Lastly, as far as the amendment on flowers is concerned, again, we, the Group of the Greens, believe that it is absolutely scandalous that this amendment has been passed, because, ultimately, it is one of a long list of Trojan horses.
We believe that, once we agree to an exemption for flowers, other exemptions will inevitably follow.
Finally, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to point out to you that all our transport policies stipulate that we must reduce road transport.
We have missed the opportunity to do this today.
Mr President, I was driving along the Brescia-Bergamo-Milan motorway with my friend, Ugo Gustinetti, who has been an articulated lorry driver all his life.
It was Sunday, there were no cars on the road, only articulated lorries and trucks, and Ugo said to me, 'How nice it is to travel on Sunday without all the holiday traffic!
I am really enjoying my job, and you know why?
Because the European Parliament has adopted a directive by Mr Savary, who, in his wisdom - suggested even by his name - has laid down that work must come before play on Saturdays and Sundays.
In other words, articulated lorries have priority on the roads and holiday-makers are not allowed to travel.'
Was I dreaming, Mr President?
Mr President, the future of this European Union of ours is dependent to a crucial degree on its acceptance by the public, and this is something we must always bear in mind when proposing regulatory schemes.
That is why I advocated leaving the regulation of travel restrictions to the Member States.
Appropriate measures relating to restrictions at weekends or on public holidays should really be taken by the Member States, as it is these that are best suited to responding to special circumstances.
The Member States should generally be allowed to impose limitations from the outset for environmental and safety reasons, and it is imperative that geographical considerations be taken into account.
What should, though, be seen in a positive light, is the reference to the special case represented by the transportation of easily perishable foodstuffs such as milk, fruit or vegetables.
Mr President, I voted in favour of the Savary Report, albeit with some difficulty, as it appears to be a step forwards, but far from being what I would have liked.
I do believe that regulations on the restriction of vehicle movements should be applied more restrictively in order to protect the environment and the public, and also to exert a certain pressure to develop alternatives and examine them critically.
Apart from that, I take the view that it would be necessary to apply the subsidiarity principle in this situation and that tighter regional regulations would also have been feasible as a means of pressing for research into the alternatives I have already mentioned.
Despite that, I still see it as a step in the right direction, even though it needs to be followed by others in the near future.
It makes sense to harmonise driving restrictions on lorries at European level, since each Member State currently applies its own regulations.
There is no reason, though, why harmonisation should be carried out based on the most moderate regulations, according to the wishes of the road transport lobbies, as this would involve limiting the restrictions and allowing States that are indulgent towards HGV transport to allow hauliers to travel as and when they like.
We therefore voted in favour of all the amendments which seek to introduce additional driving restrictions, taking into account 'topographical , environmental or road safety grounds?.
Since these restrictions were not adopted, we voted against the report.
More generally speaking, however, the problem cannot be resolved simply by means of regulation.
It would not be enough just to ban transporting goods by road at weekends.
We should develop rail transport and combined road-rail transport as part of a European public railway service.
.
(DE) The Austrian Freedom Party's delegation rejects the Commission proposal for harmonised rules for restrictions on heavy goods vehicle traffic at weekends and on public holidays.
One reason for this is that the directive would violate the subsidiarity principle and would substantially limit national competence in the area of Austria's road traffic regulations.
Another is that a transit country like Austria cannot be expected to tolerate relaxation of the travel bans at weekends and on public holidays; increasing levels of traffic are even now exacting a heavy toll on our environment and on the health of the Austrian people.
On the contrary, we need to focus primarily on a Europe-wide solution to traffic problems and on the promotion of alternative means of transport.
Mr President, in the dim and distant past - 1963 - I met Mr Turchi's father.
He was a sailor and, last night, I dreamed that he and his son, Mr Turchi, the rapporteur, were sailing a yacht across a stormy sea.
As he steered the boat through the storm out to sea, I am sure he said to his son, who was still a little boy: 'you see how to steer a boat along the right course through a storm?
You too, in the future, when you become a Member of the European Parliament, will be able to find the right course for European roads to follow.?
Well then, how could I not follow Mr Turchi's recommendations in his report on direction and on European roads?
That is why I voted for the motion.
Mr President, as you would expect, I voted in favour of the Turchi report, which increases European financing for cross-border networks to 20%. In my view, however, the Commission's proposal falls a very long way short of the challenges and, in particular, of the new guidelines for its policy on sustainable mobility.
First of all, if the level of support is increased but budgets stay the same, there is a strong risk of causing disappointment and of giving rise to extremely difficult negotiations when the documents are presented to us.
Secondly, Europe cannot carry on indefinitely being a major prescriber and a bad payer.
When we see the delays incurred in work on the projects approved at the Essen summit, when we see that today, when a new policy on sustainable mobility is being proposed which is extremely demanding in terms of public incentives, when we see that the Council has just withdrawn or deferred the six new projects that were absolutely essential for implementing the Commission's new transport policy, projects which were included in the guideline proposals on European public networks, we can only appeal for the problem of financing trans-European networks to be tackled at last, and that our European transport policy is finally allocated the resources that match its ambitions.
The report highlights the poor development in trans-European networks in the area of transport, particularly the rail network, as well as in the interconnection between energy networks.
This poor development is the by-product of developing the European economy within restricted national frameworks.
But trans-European infrastructures also suffer from this 'scarcity of government funding? criticised in the report.
In order to overcome this scarcity, the rapporteur is happy simply to tempt those with private capital with additional subsidies.
We voted against the report because we are opposed to using public money to increase private profits.
Furthermore, the aim of increased interconnection in the gas and electricity markets is not to rationalise energy distribution throughout the Union, but to completely open up the gas and electricity market to competition, which is one step further, particularly in France, towards the privatisation of EDF and GDF, a process that we reject wholeheartedly.
Rather than continuing to favour large companies and their shareholders, we should instead be taxing them more, so that the various States or the European Community can finance a transport network for the twenty-first century.
We are not so naïve, however, as to expect this to be achieved by the current European institutions, which are all completely committed to private interests.
. (NL) Over the past decade, the first thought was of building national motorway networks, and then attention turned to building and expanding airports.
Only in the last few years have most Member States invested in improving the railways and sometimes inland shipping too.
It is a fact that some of these high-speed links are at the expense of improving and maintaining short-distance rail transport.
It is uncertain whether expensive goods railways, such as the Betuwelijn in the Netherlands, will actually be used as long as companies retain the freedom to transport their goods by road more cheaply and connecting railway capacity in neighbouring countries is lacking.
These investments may be controversial, but it is a fact that an integrated European railway network which crosses borders, mountain ranges and coastal routes at high speed, is still not in existence.
Mr Turchi, the rapporteur, is right to conclude that investments in the railways and in inland shipping are lagging behind and that too little progress is being made on the construction of tunnels under the Alps and Pyrenees.
In order to end the busy HGV traffic through these mountains and the long deviations which passenger trains have to negotiate, these tunnels must be granted priority.
Expanding co-financing to 20% is acceptable for this purpose, but no funding should be claimed from this amount for any other projects.
If it were, then there would be nothing left to distribute and the stagnation would simply persist.
. (PT) The Commission's intention with this proposal, which has been accepted by the rapporteur, is primarily to guarantee the funding of 12 priority projects in the field of energy, whilst also ensuring that the Barcelona conclusions are implemented, particularly with regard to the liberalisation of the energy sector.
These are the reasons why the Commission proposes to increase Community cofinancing from 10% to 20%.
In addition to a change of priorities in the field of the trans-European networks, the proposal also and once again provides a shift of focus, relocating it to Eastern Europe, to the detriment of the current cohesion countries, such as Portugal, which are given only marginal consideration in the document.
The proposal suggests further needs of EUR 150 million for the financial perspectives for the 2000-2006 period.
The Commission intends to provide funding of EUR 100 million, however, using amounts included in the current threshold for internal policies, which will provide greater openings for other objectives under this budget heading. The Commission also proposes to reallocate EUR 50 million in favour of cross-border projects within the current transport TENs envelope.
Under these circumstances, this proposal does not deserve our support.
Mr President, the excise duty on biofuels is being reduced.
Excise duty is a word which, associating as I do with pensioners and on the basis of my own personal experience, reminds me of liqueurs, beer, wine and Martini.
It is therefore right and proper that excise duty should be reduced.
Why did I mention Martini?
Because, coincidentally, I will shortly be attending a meeting of the prestigious Kangaroo Group, at which Count Rossi di Montelera, President of Bacardi Martini, will be a guest and at which I will have the honour of being officially welcomed to the Group.
Therefore, roll on the reduction in excise duty on all products!
Hurrah for beer, hurrah for wine and hurrah for Martini!
Mr President, I am really pleased that this report incorporates the proposal by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that it must in future be possible to completely exempt from consumer taxes biofuels and petrol manufactured from biological materials.
However, it really breaks my heart that this is to be possible only up to 2010.
However, I hope that it will be possible to introduce such a tax exemption after this period, as the manufacturers need a degree of certainty in order to be able to make the necessary investments.
Biodiesel represents an important contribution to attaining the Kyoto target and gives us independence from fossil sources of energy.
I want, finally, to emphasise that the production of renewable raw materials will secure existing and new jobs in rural areas, including in the run-up to enlargement.
.
(NL) In actual fact, the use of car fuels should not be subsidised by the tax authorities, and mixing in petroleum is susceptible to fraud.
Even a relatively environmentally-friendly biofuel can be used as a means of promoting and justifying the increase in car traffic.
The choice in favour of more public transport is preferable because this transport can make use of energy gained from water, wind and sun more easily.
As the driving power used in transport vehicles, this type of energy remains the best option.
Needless to say, vegetable products are preferable to drilling or extracting minerals, for which the landscape is often destroyed and polluted.
The incineration of these fossil fuels is a major contributing factor to global warming.
More vegetable fuel means that a larger area of agricultural land is required, and that this land will be worked intensively.
The same piece of land cannot be used subsequently for producing food for our growing world population.
These fuels labelled as environmentally-friendly probably promote the expansion of farmland at the expense of the tropical rainforests that have already been hugely affected.
Despite this, a lower tax on biofuel which causes fewer environmental problems is, for the time being, justifiable as a means of influencing the behaviour of consumers and industry.
In fact, no EU regulation is required for this, because Member States must be able to do this independently.
If the rapporteur proposes to reinforce this freedom, then I will support him in this.
It is perfectly legitimate for Member States to use differentiated taxation to try to encourage the competitiveness of fuels of plant origin, which are renewable and do not contribute to the greenhouse effect.
The Member States must be in a position to gradually transform excise duty on car fuels into a type of ecotax that would be higher for fossil fuels than for renewable fuels due to the negative external costs of fossil fuels.
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Affairs, I am pleased to see that Parliament has adopted the main amendments that I tabled and that our committee has given its unanimous approval to: complete tax exemption for fuels used in biofuel production, which is already the case in the manufacture of oil products; the need to avoid increased use of biofuels causing biomass imports, since the European Union would consequently not benefit from reduced greenhouse gas emissions and from the by-product of protein fodder crops that can be used for animal feed and which is in great shortage.
Mr President, Mr Rübig is proposing that an independent European agency should be created to carry out all the nuclear security controls.
It would be - and it will be, if we succeed - a major undertaking, but Mr Rübig is famous in this House for representing small and medium-sized undertakings.
I am therefore pleased to see that he is, at last, preparing to mastermind the major undertaking of successfully setting up this Community body on nuclear safety.
That is why I voted for the motion.
. (NL) Nuclear energy is a very controversial issue, but following years of inactivity in the wake of the Harrisburg and Chernobyl disasters, attempts are once again being made to build new nuclear plants.
As long as nuclear energy exists, for peaceful or military purposes, the risks remain considerable.
Not only does the explosion or meltdown of installations threaten the life of a wide environment, there are also dangerous radio-active residual products with an incredibly long half-life.
It is precisely these residual products that are attractive to criminals and terrorists, who, by threatening to spread dangerous substances, force others to admit defeat.
In my view, the rapporteur is too optimistic if he believes that problems of this kind can be avoided completely by stepping up control.
Yet, this control is very much needed under the present circumstances.
It is the most useful task conceivable for what is left of Euratom, the European institution that was set up a long time ago to promote the large-scale use of nuclear energy.
We certainly need an independent office for Nuclear Safety and Protection, which can directly monitor all operators in the Member States and future Member States on the safety of nuclear plants and nuclear material.
I also support the proposed rejection of the production of nuclear weapons in the EU, as I endorse control to prevent production of this kind.
Mr President, this report calls for and promotes European cinematographic works, in particular, and other audiovisual works as well.
Therefore - as I have said on other occasions - maybe we will have European filmmaking at last.
However, I mean that there should also be a film about the European Parliament, where the main characters are the leading players at the European Parliament.
Thus, maybe we could have Commissioner Monti as a detective.
The chauffeur would be Mr Vatanen and President Prodi would, of course, be the parish priest.
Then Mr Watson would be the rector of the college, Mrs Reding would be the faithful wife, you, Vice-President Provan, could only be the Scottish millionaire and, lastly, Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would be the beautiful blonde.
So whodunnit?
Maybe Mr Fatuzzo!
Aid for the production and distribution of cinematographic and other audiovisual works in the European Union is of tremendous cultural and political importance, especially as America has a 66% hold on the market.
However, little headway has been made, despite repeated debate and measures.
The main reason for this, in our view, is because a market-driven, competitive approach has been taken.
The report expresses concern at the situation and contains a few proposals designed to uphold values which, generally speaking, are all well and good but still amount to no more than a wish list.
The report is far more concerned with the country of origin than the standard of works and its hopes are vested in making (even) this sector subject to the laws of the internal market, i.e. greater commercialisation.
It suggests creating a new financial instrument which will be applied arbitrarily to audiovisual cultural works and will replace qualitative rivalry with a sort of cultural Procrustes and farcical competition between Europe and Hollywood.
In our opinion, instead of trying to compete with American blockbusters under market rules, we should try and develop, exchange and enrich all popular and national cultures both inside and outside the European Union.
Such a policy would help us to maintain standards against dumbing down, whatever its origin.
This, combined with the fact that the report contained a number of positive points, is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece abstained from voting.
The UK delegation of the EPP-ED reserves its position on paragraph 35, which calls for Article 151 to be changed to operate under qualified majority rule.
Notwithstanding this reservation the delegation supports the overall stance of the Vander Taelen report.
We did not reject this report, since we are in favour of cinema and culture being accessible to all, which is far from the case today.
We refused, however, to vote in favour of the report, which accuses the Commission - which is incredible, given its policy! - of neglecting the industrial aspect of the audiovisual industry?only to call for more subsidies for the capital invested in this sector.
We are not opposed to assisting the creation and distribution of works, but the rapporteur is more concerned about those with capital at their disposal than about spectators.
We should support, for example, local authorities which are struggling to subsidise and therefore to keep open local cinemas, fulfilling an important role in distributing works cheaply amongst the general public, and encourage other local authorities to follow suit.
But this is not the aim of the report, which advocates financing research and development into e-cinema, fitting cinemas with expensive equipment, recommending that we let the market take care of the rest.
In other words, once again, in order to develop a so-called 'under-capitalised' industry, given that the private sector will not take risks in this area without a safety net, the public is being called upon to finance future private profits.
This report explores some interesting options for maintaining and strengthening the film industry of the EU Member States.
The emphasis placed on the dual - i.e. cultural and industrial - nature of cinematographic and audiovisual works does not make sense since the advantages to be gained from paying this sector greater attention lie precisely in promoting its cultural dimension.
Nevertheless, for a credible European film industry to survive when up against the powerful Hollywood production companies, we need to support large industrial companies that can rival mass production.
Furthermore, the proposals in the report are, for the most part, worthy of interest.
They include co-financing work to digitise archives, supporting digital projection equipment, as well as calling for tax incentives to be introduced by Member States for audiovisual products and services; the wide spectrum of proposed measures is vast.
We can hope that, if they were applied, real progress could be made in the industries and services in the audiovisual sector.
As far as defining new legal standards for harmonisation between the various national laws, this idea in itself cannot be condemned, but we must prevent this harmonisation from serving as a pretext for promoting a European culture that does not really exist.
Mr President, I personally and the Pensioners' Party I represent consider that it is important to support the common foreign and security policy, as is advocated by this report on conciliation for the budget.
Indeed, in my opinion, Europe will only be great when it has common defence and is able to intervene with military force to safeguard its democratic identity.
In my opinion, this - the enhancement of the European common security policy - is the only way to move from a Europe of paper and charters to a genuinely powerful Europe which is a worldwide leader.
I would like to put on record my reasons for voting against certain sections of Mr Färm's report today, in particular those paragraphs dealing with agriculture.
We are all aware that the Commission's proposals for the mid-term review of the CAP are due out next week.
I will oppose strongly any attempts to turn that review into a reform.
The agreement reached in Berlin in 1999 on Agenda 2000 still stands and will be reviewed before the end of 2006 so as to examine the next financial perspective.
Fundamental reform of the CAP at this stage is neither necessary nor desirable.
The markets are reasonably stable and the Berlin ceilings are not threatened.
As regards the rural development pillar, the Commission is expected to propose compulsory modulation from direct payments and this has also been put forward by Mr Färm.
I reject this notion and support the concept of voluntary modulation which was agreed by the 15 Member States in Berlin.
I fully support the aims of rural development but I firmly believe that direct payments are a key element in keeping alive small family holdings and maintaining rural communities right across Ireland.
Mr President, as everybody knows, Mr Podestà is an extremely wise, fair Vice-President of this House.
I closed my eyes just now and saw him as the new king of Afghanistan, with a crown, sceptre, a long beard and great power.
Why is that?
Because item 13 of Mr Podestà's report states that the European Parliament reiterates 'its will to support the reconstruction of Afghanistan? and its willingness to use humanitarian aid properly and 'in an efficient way to help the Afghan people?.
He had succeeded in that intention, in that second in which I saw him, and the Afghans, who were happy to have received such a large amount of aid from Mr Podestà, had decided to appoint and crown him king of Afghanistan.
.
(PT) This report commits three cardinal sins.
Firstly, it unreservedly accepts the limit on the clearly insufficient spending under the current financial framework.
Secondly, it claims that the Commission is presenting proposals to institutionalise a policy for redistributing budgetary appropriations, recommending greater flexibility and providing for transfers between sectors and budget lines, to the detriment of budgetary discipline. Lastly, the report deliberately exaggerates its criticism of low implementation rates for the Structural Funds, a criticism which is all the more unfair because it fails to take account either of the uncertainties facing any financial framework in its initial phase of implementation or of the conditions imposed as a result of the implementation of the Stability Pact.
With regard to the latter sin, two objectives are clear: to use the low implementation rate as an argument for reducing Community spending on the cohesion countries - with the same thing happening with cooperation and development policies - in the face of enlargement and whilst satisfying the interests of the well-off donor countries; and denouncing 'reforms? in the regulations of the Structural Funds, taking advantage of the interim review of Agenda 2000.
For these reasons, we could not vote for this report.
That concludes the explanations of vote.
(The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
The next item is the report (A5-0220/2002) by Mrs Piia-Noora Kauppi on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the 2001 Annual Report of the European Central Bank (C5-0196/2002 - 2002/2092(COS)).
I welcome Mr Duisenberg, the President of the European Central Bank.
It is a great pleasure and honour to have you present.
In view of the rising value of the euro, we all look forward to what you have to say.
Mr President, six months ago we witnessed a milestone in European history: the launch of "the euro, our money", in its visible form.
European citizens are now able to perceive - and to benefit from - the tangible reality of the euro, and the rapid substitution of what we call the legacy currencies at the beginning of this year bears witness to the successful launch of the euro banknotes and coins.
The year 2001 provided a particularly challenging environment for the monetary policy of the European Central Bank.
The worsening economic outlook was accompanied by short-term upward pressures on prices from various sources, which complicated the conduct of monetary policy.
This task was made even more difficult by the extreme uncertainty which followed the terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September.
As usual, the monetary policy response of the ECB to such a situation had to look beyond short-term developments, focusing on the risks to price stability over the medium term.
From this perspective, we could see that medium-term inflationary pressures were in fact receding.
The ECB took account of this by reducing interest rates four times in 2001, by a total of 150 basis points.
As a consequence, the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations of the ECB - the most important amongst our key interest rates - reached 3.25% in November 2001.
The key ECB interest rates have remained unchanged since November and short and long-term real interest rates have been, in a historical perspective, very low.
The average annual inflation rate in 2001, as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, was 2.5%.
Inflation in 2001 was affected by the lagged effects in import price increases in 2000, and by the new impact of livestock diseases on unprocessed food prices.
We are not satisfied with such an outcome, which is not in line with price stability.
However, it has to be recognised that the factors which contributed to shaping this outcome could not be controlled by the ECB.
In fact, monetary policy only affects inflation with a lag and cannot control it in the short term.
We are satisfied that our policy last year was very well understood by our observers and by the markets.
In fact, the level of bond yields, as well as various other indicators of inflation expectations of economic agents, pointed to continued confidence throughout 2001 in the ECB maintaining price stability in the medium term.
There were - and there still are - some concerns about the possible impact of the cash changeover on euro area inflation, which have also been echoed in the draft resolution on the ECB's Annual Report prepared by your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
Indeed, the increase in annual consumer price inflation in the euro area from 2.0% in December 2001 to 2.7% in January 2002 has unfortunately been associated, in many people's minds, with the cash changeover.
In reality, other factors contributed to this increase, such as the rise in vegetable prices related to adverse weather conditions, particularly in southern Europe, and higher tobacco taxes in several euro area countries.
But it has also to be recognised that, in particular in some sectors with a low level of competition, some upward price adjustments might have occurred in connection with the cash changeover.
However, there were also price reductions in the euro area associated with the cash changeover and statistical evidence has so far confirmed that the effect on the overall price level has been contained.
Turning now to the current economic situation, over the past few months economic conditions have gradually changed.
The impact of the terrorist attacks on economic confidence has gradually faded away and economic activity has stabilised.
While the strength of the ongoing recovery is still subject to uncertainty, the most likely scenario is for economic activity to gradually accelerate and reach levels in line with trend potential growth later this year.
Regarding monetary developments, we saw a high demand for liquid and safe assets in the autumn of last year, particularly associated with financial market uncertainty following the terrorist attacks.
We saw some moderation in early 2002 but recent data indicate a new increase in the demand for liquid assets.
In addition, the decline in the growth of loans to the private sector has come to a halt and credit demand has recently strengthened.
These developments need to be closely monitored, as they may start to point to upward risks to price stability, in particular during a period of economic recovery.
Overall, the outlook for price stability is now less benign than it was in November 2001, when we last adjusted the key ECB interest rates.
Inflation has so far declined less steeply and less rapidly than we expected at the turn of the year.
This again has been partly due to the temporary factors I mentioned before, and to the renewed increase in oil prices in the first quarter of 2002.
At the current juncture, even though the appreciation of the exchange rate of the euro will contribute to easing inflationary pressures, we will continue to closely monitor all relevant developments, against the background of the risks that the deviations from price stability, which followed the exceptional clustering of upward shocks on inflation over the past couple of years, may be transmitted into longer-term inflation expectations, thereby potentially affecting wage and price-setting behaviour.
In order to maintain price stability, it is crucial that wage moderation prevails also in the future.
In this respect, we are concerned about recent trends in wages here and there.
The importance of wage developments in line with our definition of price stability cannot be overemphasised.
Wage moderation is a key factor in favouring the expansion of employment and in helping to create the conditions for a sustainable increase in the potential growth rate of the euro area economy.
Current estimates for trend potential growth in the euro area are in the order of 2-2½% and there is much scope for raising potential growth in the euro area.
The ECB will make its contribution by focusing on maintaining price stability in the medium term.
But other policy actors also have to take up their responsibilities.
The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for 2002, which have just been approved in Seville, place the emphasis quite rightly on the need for further structural reforms in the euro area.
I understand that this view is also shared in the draft resolution.
The future welfare of euro area citizens will also depend to a large extent on the prudent conduct of fiscal policies.
The solidarity pact of our monetary union requires all participants to maintain a medium-term perspective in compliance with the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact.
This implies that budgetary positions in all countries should be close to balance or in surplus over the business cycle as a whole in order to allow sufficient room for a smooth functioning of automatic stabilisers.
We have seen some worrying developments in fiscal policy in some countries over the last few months.
We therefore recall the importance for those countries that still have not achieved a balanced budget position to honour their commitments to catch up with the other countries of the euro area by 2003/2004.
Let me now turn to some other issues raised in the draft resolution on the ECB's Annual Report.
We welcome the draft resolution's clear support for the ECB's monetary policy strategy.
The draft resolution concludes that short-term movements in monetary aggregates should not be overemphasised and that there should not be any mechanical reaction to deviations of M3 growth from the reference value.
This is fully in line with the ECB's monetary policy strategy and practice.
The first pillar of our strategy, which gives a prominent role to the analysis of monetary developments, is based on the empirical evidence of a close and stable relationship between money and prices in the euro area over the medium term.
There is no evidence yet to suggest that this link has weakened over time.
The ECB is fully aware that monetary developments may be subject to portfolio shifts in the short term, which are not directly related to future spending decisions.
Indeed, what matters is to identify and understand the underlying reasons for monetary developments in order to assess the implications for the risks to price stability over the medium term.
In this respect, the analysis of monetary developments has provided useful guidance to the ECB's monetary policy also over the past year.
This then leads me to another point mentioned in the draft resolution, namely the importance for a central bank to take account of asset prices when assessing risks to price stability, while not introducing moral hazard in financial markets through inappropriate reactions to excessive asset price developments.
The ECB fully shares this view.
It closely monitors asset price developments as indicators for monetary policy but it does not target them or react to them mechanically.
As regards the proposed endorsement of macroeconomic projections by the Governing Council of the ECB, allow me to clarify once again the role of those projections in the process of monetary policy-making at the ECB.
These projections play an important role for us, but they have by no means an all-encompassing role.
They are an important technical input by ECB and national central bank staff in summarising and assessing the implications of a large body of information for future inflation in a consistent way.
However, we are also fully aware of the difficulties of making projections.
In particular, we recognise that it is impossible to summarise all the relevant information for assessing the maintenance of price stability in one single projection.
Given the difficulties of forecasting over the longer term and the uncertainty regarding the appropriate economic model, we do not advocate the use of a single projection to analyse the risks to price stability.
We therefore explicitly look at many other indicators and analyses in the context of our two-pillar strategy, and we do not try to hide the complexity of monetary policy-making behind the production of a single Governing Council forecast.
The projections reflect the expert judgement of Eurosystem staff and we prefer to keep this distinct from the judgement of the Governing Council regarding the overall assessment of the risks to price stability.
Therefore, our decision to clearly separate the production of the projections from the analysis of the Governing Council is fully transparent as it honestly reflects the decision-making process within the ECB.
As regards communication, we have always taken an approach that ensures a high level of transparency and clarity of our message.
Our monthly press conferences are key in this respect.
The timeliness and the detail of our communication are without comparison.
At the same time, we have not changed our view regarding the publication of minutes.
We fear that, given the multi-country context in which the Governing Council works, published minutes - or a procedure in which dissenting views of Council members are published (even without mentioning names) - could lead to undue pressure on national central bank governors to deviate from a euro area perspective.
This cannot be in the interest of the euro area, no more than if the Governing Council were to end its approach of speaking with one voice.
The draft resolution also suggests that the balance of votes within the Governing Council should be published anonymously.
As I stated in my last testimony, I have some doubts whether this would give more clarity to the markets or more transparency than is the case now.
In any event, I believe it is crucial that we continue to place the emphasis of our communication on the economic rationale behind monetary policy decisions, rather than on a pattern of differing views in the Governing Council.
To conclude my statement, I should like to briefly refer again to the euro cash changeover.
With a single currency, our citizens now have a common symbol of European identity which they use in their daily lives.
Indeed, the euro has created the foundations that may stimulate further integration - in the political, economic and financial fields.
In this sense, "the euro, our money" can provide a new and more solid basis on which to build an "ever closer union".
Thank you, Mr Duisenberg.
You have fans in the visitors' gallery, but unfortunately, they are not permitted to applaud.
However, the Members in the body of the House may do so.
Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, the Stability and Growth Pact is an essential element in the credibility of the Euro area.
Measures taken by governments in the Euro area to reorganise public finances have created a basis for sustainable economic growth and a strengthening of the euro.
Although I do not at present see any need to alter the Stability and Growth Pact of 1997, I nevertheless support the notion that any possible uncovered pension obligations in the Member States and current levels of taxation should also be taken into consideration when assessing payments made by euro countries in compliance with that agreement.
Funded pension obligations and low taxes do mean there is more room to move in a crisis.
During recent months the euro has strengthened against the dollar.
Although parity in itself has no economic importance it is nevertheless a psychologically significant sign of the confidence market and financial players have in the stability of the Euro area and a development that is seen as positive.
I agree with the ECB's judgment that the strengthening of the euro against the dollar is a positive development, as long as the currency strengthens in a controlled way and not too fast.
Increased private investment in the Euro area shows that investors have more faith in the future of the Euro zone than they do in the medium-term economic prospects of the United States of America.
Enron, Xerox, Worldcom, as well as any subsequent cases, will probably only serve to strengthen this development.
The question arises as to what impact the strengthening of the euro will have on inflationary pressures.
In the last few days we have been hearing conflicting messages from Mr Eichel and Mr Solbes, among others.
It has, for example, been stated that the euro's parity with the dollar is reducing pressure on the raising of interest rates.
Others, meanwhile, have been concerned about the strengthening of the euro against the dollar, as was revealed, for example, in the interview Commissioner Solbes gave last Saturday.
How in this connection are we to appraise, furthermore, the action that the ECB took last Friday when it intervened in the currency markets in collaboration with Japan?
I would very much like to hear Mr Duisenberg's view of this matter, and especially concerning whether the strengthening of the euro against the dollar will make it possible to keep interest rates at their present level.
Inflation is 1.7% at the moment, its lowest since December 1999.
Last week's M3 growth figures were higher than predicted.
This raises the question as to how this will affect the ECB's current monetary policy.
This fundamental question relates to the whole role of the first pillar.
We support the two-pillar strategy.
The long-term link between money and inflation is recognised by most academics.
However, first pillar management is complex and is sometimes ill suited to day-to-day decision-making.
I would hope that the ECB will explain the content and role of the first pillar in detail in its monetary policy.
At a time when the markets are highly volatile, it is more important than ever for the ECB to act transparently.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the European Central Bank and its chairman for improvements in its information practices and its positive attitude to dialogue with Parliament regarding monetary policy.
At the same time, in its report, Parliament encourages the ECB Governing Council to exploit the decision-making process made possible by the EU Treaty by voting.
This will make it possible to react to changes in developments more rapidly if necessary.
The results of voting in the Governing Council should also be made public. If dissenting opinion and any results of voting are published anonymously it will strengthen the confidence, such as it is now, the markets have in the European Central Bank.
Making more information available will enable better forecasts to be made of future developments.
It is the opinions of our citizens that are the basis for our work.
Two out of three consumers in the Euro area believe that when they switched to the euro prices went up and products became more expensive compared to average prices at the end of the previous year.
This feeling they have is not, however, borne out by statistics on inflation.
The measures Member States have taken to stabilise their economies have led to a very low average inflation figure over the last three years.
The occasional, relatively tiny price rises in the service sector were felt by consumers to be surprisingly dramatic.
We must therefore in future ensure that the public is very clearly informed about developments concerning the euro.
According to research, over 60% of consumers still do not think in euros when they consider the prices of products.
For this reason I would urge Member States to keep to dual pricing to allow us all more time to get used to our new money.
We must not permit any gap in our awareness of prices, and consumers in the future must be able to prevent additional inflation though their own purchasing decisions.
Dual pricing will also ensure that the forthcoming holiday period in central Europe will flow smoothly.
Last week a figure who was at the heart of the subject of our discussion today passed away at the age of 88: Luxembourg's Prime Minister, who was in office for many years and was one of the founding fathers of the euro, Pierre Werner.
In the 1970s Mr Werner drafted the Werner report, named after him, which created a basis for setting up the European Central Bank.
I too, as the European Parliament's rapporteur, wish to dedicate the last part of my speech to the memory of Mr Werner.
Pierre Werner was a man of great vision.
The European Union is founded on common visions - the views of our continent's citizens and statesmen - of how common European challenges should be resolved.
We must bear in mind these visions, these common aims, and, moreover, the jointly agreed principles regarding responsible and sustainable economic policy, when we seek solutions to our continent's political and economic problems.
Mr Duisenberg, Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to divide what I am going to say into four parts. First, I want to thank the rapporteur for a highly comprehensive report which not only evaluates the ECB's report, but also enlarges on it and adds demands for future action, some of which originated in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee.
Secondly, I want to thank you, Mr Duisenberg, and the Executive Board for your good cooperation with Parliament and especially with our Committee, although there is room for improvement on both sides.
For our part, we are endeavouring to step up dialogue and make it more exciting, to put questions in clearer terms and elicit more definite answers from you, whilst expecting that you will engage in more public information work.
The public does not always find it easy to discern the thinking behind the ECB's decisions, but we are all aware that its policies directly affect purchasing patterns and the currency; hence the need for more public information to achieve greater transparency, acceptance on the part of the European public, and the stimulation of the economy within the framework outlined in your speech.
We want to congratulate you not only on the work you have done and on the balance sheet you have produced, but also on what you did in the aftermath of 11 September, when the ECB's measures on interest rate and liquidity policy, agreed in consultation with the Federal Reserve Bank, made a good impression as an immediate response to the attacks and one by which the threat of a financial crisis could be successfully averted.
Congratulations also on the successful introduction of euro notes and coins, which faced us in this House with the problem of having statistics indicating, on the one hand, that the introduction went without a hitch, and, on the other, that there was great public uncertainty, on which paragraph 18 of the resolution is intended to have an effect.
I would like to take the opportunity of my speech today to make it clear that the Stability and Growth Pact has played a part in the success of the euro and of the ECB, and that we resist all attempts at reinterpreting and nullifying the Stability and Growth Pact, which arise from short-sighted opportunism in response to day-to-day political events; the aftermath of enlargement will call for further structural and other reforms in politics and in the ECB.
We hope that your work will continue to meet with such success and that you will also prove equal to these challenges.
(Applause from the right)
Mr President, the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports Mrs Kauppi's report.
It is true, in view of this year's presentation, that the European Central Bank is especially to be congratulated not only on having managed to make the eurozone an object lesson in the importance of the euro as a response to external shocks, but also on the introduction of euro notes and coins having been so successful.
We have detected some dissatisfaction with the new money on the part of some members of the public, but Europe has in any case demonstrated that it can achieve something when it stands shoulder to shoulder.
According to one survey, 64% of all members of the public at last feel a little more like Europeans now they have the euro in their pockets.
That is the way it should be!
The public's price awareness, however, is not as it should be, as the real rate of price increase in the eurozone, which is statistically verifiable and extremely low, does not relate to the inflation that people perceive.
Parliament was therefore right always to back a campaign of information and to insist that the introduction of euro notes and coins should be understood as a conversion not merely in the technical sense, but also as one with great psychological significance.
That being the case, it is also important that we should send out positive signals.
The fact that consumers can sense overnight the advantages of monetary union when they use a card to withdraw cash, is very important.
More advantages will become apparent, for example in the holiday season that is just beginning.
That is certainly attributable to Parliament's efforts.
I will now briefly consider the concerns about the revaluation of the euro.
Euro/US dollar exchange rate convergence certainly makes a slow curve desirable, but that cannot be controlled.
It cannot, then, be emphasised too strongly that falling import prices in this phase of a slow recovery in the eurozone facilitate an environment that favours an expansive monetary policy and do not in any case necessitate decisions to change interest rates in any direction.
The EU is dependent on this in order to keep the Lisbon process on track.
The European Central Bank bears a great responsibility.
It is to be hoped that the coordination of economic policies will at last actually create a favourable environment for all the actors.
There have recently been less favourable developments in the aggregate money supply, which, however, have a silver lining in that they indicate recovery, being a sign that enterprises are obtaining liquidity for investment in future economic growth, and this, for Europe, is a matter of life and death.
I do think it important that there should be even greater transparency in the European Monetary Union.
I set great store by the European Central Bank's willingness to listen to Parliament's arguments that we should know all the reasoning underlying decisions on monetary policy.
That is also good for the European Central Bank's credibility and trustworthiness.
The European Central Bank also has the task of helping to build up financial stability.
It counts for a lot with me that the European Central Bank should continue to promote financial stability and, unlike the American Federal Reserve, should not allow its monetary policy to support the creation of speculative bubbles.
Even in future, the ECB must not permit its own conduct to give rise to moral hazards!
Mr President, since there is a very large measure of agreement in this House over the fundamentals of policy towards the ECB, I would like to address one specific measure which we have in the draft resolution, which we have requested before without receiving a formal response from the Governing Council in the Annual Report, and I hope this will be rectified.
It is the issue of publishing the balance of votes on an anonymous basis, so that the markets and Parliament can assess the shift of opinion over time.
You, Mr Duisenberg, have raised objections in the past to such a move, because the Governing Council tends to decide by consensus.
I was glad that you indicated to us in committee that you would reconsider this over time.
I hope that you will decide to take decisions by majority voting, both because this would lead to more efficient decision-making and because you are asked to do so in the Treaties.
I would like to make it clear that I do not share the criticism over the last year that the ECB has acted too little and too late.
In fact the ECB first cut interest rates in May 2001 despite a continuing rise in inflation, which had still to peak at 3.4%.
You have honoured your monetary reference values only in the breach, and in 26 out of 41 months you have allowed inflation to exceed your target range.
This is a pragmatic institution.
However, we know from the Council of Ministers that voting by consensus, in other words by unanimity, is slower and more difficult than voting by majority.
For this reason alone, it would be sensible for the ECB in future to vote by majority.
The fact that present procedures have not led to mistakes is not an argument against improving them, particularly when this is what the Treaty requires.
Article 10 of the Protocol on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks clearly states that the Governing Council shall act by a simple majority.
Therefore, I hope that the Governing Council will also note its Treaty obligations in the manner of its decision-taking by majority.
Mr President, the ECB's report makes a critical comment to the effect that, in 2001, most of the countries in the eurozone did not succeed in reaching their budget targets.
Germany, France, Italy and Portugal again recorded relatively high deficits.
There are warnings that the incidence of deficits could rise even higher.
To put it another ways, budgetary consolidation, second only to the maintenance of price stability as a primary objective of European economic policy, is in danger.
Sufficient stability is not being achieved, nor is space being made for policy creation, which is no less important.
It is unfortunate that Parliament's report does not give adequate emphasis to this issue.
Unlike Mr Karas, I take the view that the Stability and Growth Pact deserves to be a matter of controversy.
It is, in my judgement, in grave crisis because its reference value of 3% was laid down arbitrarily and is too rigid.
In times of stagnation and recession, its shackles prove to have a toxic effect on economic recovery.
It is no accident that the eurozone finance ministers have already called on the Commission to take more account of cyclical fluctuations when assessing the Member States' budgetary positions.
I therefore strongly urge that the Stability Pact be reformed and supplemented by an employment pact which would require the Member States' economic policies to be comprehensively coordinated.
As we used to hear from France - which is now under a conservative government - the Stability Pact is not graven on marble.
The objective must be the speedy creation of room in which an anti-cyclical economic policy can operate.
We must not, of course, lose sight of the need to limit debt, and countries cannot be allowed to escape being penalised by higher interest rates on their proliferating debts when they make themselves rich at the expense of others.
But, on the other hand, stability policy must not just be about the value of money, and must not impair society's social equilibrium.
Mr President, one would hardly guess, from reading the 2001 annual report of the European Central Bank, which comes across as balanced, technical and calm, that both 2001 and 2000 were disastrous for the euro on the foreign exchange markets.
A simple graph on page 59 shows, however, the drop in the value of the European currency, which is much more significant than all the fluctuations in the participating national currencies since 1994.
Similarly, the graph on page 65 on net financial fluctuations in the eurozone in 2000 and 2001 shows considerable jumps which illustrate the lack of investor interest in either the euro zone, our currency, or both.
Someone will no doubt tell me, however, that the European Central Bank's report was right not to emphasise these slightly less positive aspects since the euro is now faring better, and that we have come through the difficult patch.
This is a claim that we must verify.
For the time being, what we are seeing is not investor enthusiasm for the euro, but rather investors adopting a cooler approach to the dollar, related to the bursting of the technological bubble, financial scandals and, above all, we must not forget, the significant difference in interest rates which does not work in favour of the US currency.
For the time being, therefore, the dollar's troubles are working to the euro's advantage, but we must continue to be cautious because the underlying problems of the European currency are still unresolved.
First of all, growth in Europe remains weak, and the introduction of the euro has not stimulated it, in spite of the promises that were made.
And, more importantly, there is still a huge question mark for the future, namely that of the problematic coexistence of a single currency and a disparate economic and social zone, whose sub-sections might diverge.
In order to remedy this problem, some people are contemplating a more or less forced integration.
In our view, Mr President, we hope that Europe, in spite of this uncomfortable situation, will be able to remain both flexible and liberal.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, contrary to what Mr Berthu says, I think that the European Central Bank can pride itself on presenting a more than satisfactory statement.
The euro is a success: more than 50 countries already have an exchange rate regime for which the euro serves, at least in part, as a point of reference.
Our single currency has become the dollar's equal.
When the value of the euro fell in relation to the dollar, some commentators questioned the so-called lack of structural reforms in Europe.
Logic dictates that the current rise in the value of the euro against the dollar should be the result of a successful EU structural policy, unless the changes in the exchange rate between the dollar and the euro are not so much due to economic foundations than to the changing mood of the financial markets.
After the irrational exuberance on the stock markets and since the bubble of so-called new economy burst, disillusionment is the order of the day.
Virtual stock market gains have transformed into real losses.
The debt incurred by companies and private individuals is the cause of particular concern.
Added to this is the realisation that many champions of the new economy are turning out to be manipulative conmen.
During the financial crisis in Asia, many commentators condemned 'crony capitalism', capitalism marked by the complicity within these countries.
Yet, current events in the United States, and in Europe too, show us that those who preached in Wall Street, the City and elsewhere were comfortably ensconced in a sort of self-service set-up where company directors, business bankers, analysts and auditing firms gave one another a helping hand when needed.
In fact, the world of finance is currently experiencing a sort of uncontrollable collapse which is reminiscent of the crisis of 1929 and subsequent years.
Wide-ranging reforms of international finance are therefore essential.
The central banks, the EDF and the ECB in particular, must put forward proposals to improve the regulation and supervision of financial markets, including hedge funds.
Article 110(1) of the Treaty grants the European system of central banks the right to issue recommendations and opinions.
I hope and pray for recommendations from the ECB to combat crony capitalism, to introduce better regulation and supervision, in short, to create the conditions to enable us to regain the general public's confidence in an ethical financial sector.
It is not the danger of inflation that is currently threatening us, but the danger of the financial markets imploding.
The ECB cannot shirk its responsibility.
In addition, the ECB's appeals for wage moderation would be much more credible if Mr Duisenberg applied the same language of moderation to investors with capital.
(Applause from the left)
Mr President, I shall make this brief.
I would first of all like to welcome the opportunity to take part in this debate on the presentation of the Annual Report of the European Central Bank.
I should like to thank Parliament, and in particular the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and its rapporteur, Mrs Kauppi, for her excellent report.
The Commission fully agrees with many of the points of view contained in the report such as, in particular, its positive assessment of the policy of the European Central Bank.
I shall only refer to two points from today's debate, which are of particular interest to the Commission.
First, the role of the Stability and Growth Pact in the current process.
We believe the Pact has contributed to a favourable reaction by budgetary policies during the recent slowdown.
Countries that had already reached a balanced fiscal position have been able to use automatic stabilisers to absorb the effects of reduced growth.
Contrary to other situations, meanwhile, no country in debt has implemented unjustified expansionist fiscal policies.
Furthermore, the Member States have been able to continue with their fiscal reform policies which will undoubtedly help to eliminate supply rigidity.
In general, I would say that the policy of the first few years of Economic and Monetary Union has contributed to economic growth and to our macroeconomic stability.
More recently, a combination of monetary policy favourable to growth and a slightly more flexible fiscal policy has sustained cyclical recovery.
The lack of fiscal consolidation in the year 2000, however, when economic growth was flourishing, was at the root of some of the obstacles we are currently faced with, in particular in the most indebted countries.
We therefore believe that our immediate main objective is to continue with fiscal consolidation and structural reform to enable us to improve our capacity for growth.
Secondly, with regard to the euro and its impact on pricing, using quarterly data, Eurostat has come to the conclusion that in the first quarter of 2002, the inflationary impact of the euro was 0.16% in comparison with the final quarter of 2001.
This figure should, however, be used with caution.
First, because it is difficult to make these calculations; secondly, because, although this overall figure is correct, we believe there are unusually high increments for certain goods and services that are consumed regularly, which gives citizens the impression that the increase has been far greater; and thirdly, because it is equally true that the euro should, in the medium term, contribute to improving the competitive environment and economic efficiency, thus bringing down consumer prices.
That is all I have to say this afternoon.
I shall now hand over to the President of the European Central Bank, Mr Duisenberg, who I expect will have something to add.
Mr President, firstly, I wish to join Mrs Kauppi in paying my respects to the late Pierre Werner, one of the founding fathers of the European Union, whom we will never forget.
When I presented Mr Werner on 2 January with a commemorative fountain pen to celebrate, underline and thank him for his contribution to European Union, he could no longer speak, but the tears falling down his cheeks said more than any words could do.
Several Members have again played on the theme of more transparency and, in particular, the publication of minutes or, as Mr Huhne said, at least the balance of votes in the Governing Council.
I have already given a formal answer in my introductory statement, but I would like to add, in particular addressing Mr Huhne, that deciding by consensus does not mean that there is necessarily unanimity, in the sense that if there were a vote all would vote the same.
Deciding by consensus means that the conclusions reached by the Governing Council as a whole on a certain decision, in a certain direction, or to decide not to change anything, are supported by the entire Governing Council, by some more enthusiastically than others, but this does not require a vote.
One always has to remember that although the members of the Governing Council come from all the Member States, they do not represent their Member States, either in the case of national central bank governors or of their central bank.
They are there in a personal capacity and are completely independent.
That also applies to the decision-making process and at all costs we want to preserve the phenomenon that the Governing Council's decisions are decisions by a collegiate body and that every individual member of that body will defend and describe the outcome of certain discussions as if he had been 100% enthusiastic about those decisions.
They will be supported by the entire Governing Council.
We do not want to undermine that attitude in the Governing Council.
On prices and the effects of the costs of changeover, to which various Members have referred, it is true that in the public mind many of the price increases that are being observed are being attributed to the changeover to euro banknotes and coins and the rounding-off effects accompanying it.
This is true in particular of the goods we purchase every day.
For example, you do not pay your rent every day, so there is no problem there.
You do not buy a computer every day, so there is no problem there at all, because those prices have been lowered.
However, you do notice it in cafeterias, cafes or restaurants or when you try to park your car in the usual place.
Overall, statistically, Eurostat has estimated that of the 0.8% rise in inflation recorded in the first quarter of this year, between 0 and 0.16% could be attributed to the cash changeover.
However, there is a difference between the perception of the people at large and the statistical facts now that, as we expected, inflation seems at last to be on the road downwards.
We are aware of the latest flash estimate by Eurostat of inflation in June, which is said to be 1.7%, down 0.3% from May.
Even if the final figure were to be marginally higher than 1.7% we are on a downward trend.
It is also true that we at the ECB expect inflation for the remainder of this year and for next year to hover around this 2% figure and so we are in a situation where we have to be extremely vigilant with regard to the risks that the figure may exceed the 2% limit over the medium term.
There are risks, both upward and downward.
The upward risks I defined as coming from the monetary developments and maybe from current wage trends if past inflation figures work their way through in new wage agreements.
These risks are being mitigated - and I am grateful for this - by the recent significant appreciation of the euro and so we are weighing time and again the balance of these risks.
At the last meeting of the Governing Council at the beginning of June, which was devoted to our stance on monetary policy, this led us to the conclusion that the risks are there, the mitigating effects seem to be emerging, and we must wait and see how things develop.
As regards Mr Berthu's questions on investment decisions vis-à-vis Europe, which now seem to be slightly more attractive because of the exchange rate than in the past, I would like to say that the period of huge capital outflows from Europe in particular to the United States, seems to be over, both in terms of direct and portfolio investment.
There are indications that in some instances the flows have reversed and outflows have fallen sharply to say the least.
However, in determining whether Europe is an attractive place for potential investors, including foreigners, be it direct or portfolio investment, the exchange rate is only one of the considerations that are taken into account and a minor one at that.
We have to create the climate in Europe by our policies, by our wage trends and by our environment, so as to make Europe a more attractive place to invest in than it has apparently been in recent years.
For that reason also it is so crucial that the intentions of our heads of state and government to press on forcefully with structural reforms should be translated from words into deeds sooner, rather than later.
To end with Mr Goebbels' question, as far as regulation of financial markets is concerned, the ECB fully supports the financial services action plan and will do everything in its power to promote the implementation of the plan and promote the further harmonisation of regulations concerning capital market instruments, so that we get a more transparent and comparable capital market in Europe.
As regards supervision, the ECB will do everything in its power to fulfil its Treaty mandate to promote the smooth conduct of supervisory practices.
However, I have to remind you that this is the only mandate that the Treaty gives to the ECB, not the supervisory practice itself, or the formulation of the regulations that are in force.
We can promote it, we can smooth its path, we can act as a catalyst for good cooperation, but in principle supervision falls under the principle of subsidiarity.
We will do our utmost and we are doing our utmost to achieve precisely that.
I trust that I have answered the main questions.
Mr President, thank you for giving me the floor.
Mr Duisenberg, I had a small supplementary question to ask you.
You quite rightly said that the Treaty only provides you with limited powers in the area of banking supervision.
However, Article 110 provides you with the possibility of drafting recommendations and submitting opinions.
Are you going to make use of this power conferred by the Treaty?
Mr President, to use that article for specific measures in the field of banking supervision or financial regulation in general, encompassing other financial industries in that field, would, I feel, transgress our authority bearing in mind that the Treaty is so restrictive in giving precise responsibilities in banking supervision to the European Central Bank.
Thank you again.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
The next item is the joint debate on two reports, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy:
(A5-0229/2002) by Mr Trakatellis, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation concerning traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms and traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC [COM(2001 182 - C5-0380/2001 - 2001/0180(COD)];
(A5-0225/2002) by Mrs Scheele, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on genetically modified food and feed [COM(2001) 425 - C5-0368/2001 - 2001/0173(COD)].
Mr President, today we are debating a legislative proposal for a resolution which concerns (a) traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms, (b) traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms, and (c) amendment of Directive 2001/18 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms.
The main aim is to harmonise rules within the European Union in a bid to ensure the internal market operates efficiently and consumers are better informed.
Unfortunately, however, neither the Commission proposal nor the amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment offer any guarantee that these objectives will be achieved.
On the contrary, they open the way for fraud and deception, for the misleading of consumers, for the distorting of prices and competition and for less favourable treatment of EU producers and companies.
This proposal is directly related to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. However, the protocol does not contain any provision on the traceability of products made from genetically modified organisms.
This fact does not ensure legal certainty and is a shortcoming, possibly even an obstacle to adopting rules within the Community, not only for domestic Community products but, principally, for imported products.
This is because there is no legal obligation to provide all the information at each stage of the production process, thereby opening the way to all sorts of fraud and deception on the part of third country producers and suppliers.
As a result, competition will be distorted because, while European Union producers will be obliged to comply with the regulation, third-country producers and suppliers will be able to maintain that their products are made from natural substances, without anyone being able to check and verify if that is really the case.
Furthermore, if the European Union unilaterally applies traceability and labelling requirements to imported products and carries out checks without an adequate scientific basis, it may create a trade dispute with third countries which results in the matter being referred to the World Trade Organisation.
At the same time, instead of promoting biotechnology as a technology of the future which is recognised worldwide and promises a great deal for human society in the twenty-first century, the proposal deals this technology a mortal blow.
What I wonder is: who thinks up such proposals?
Everything to do with food has been based in the past on scientific analysis; this applies to testing adulterated food, to BSE, to dioxins and so on. So if it is to be absolutely efficient, this regulation needs to be combined with scientific methods for identifying the differences between products made from genetically modified organisms and conventional products.
In addition, methods currently available enable even traces of genetically modified DNA or genetically modified protein to be traced.
As your rapporteur, I differentiate between three categories on the basis of these analytical techniques: the first category of products are products containing modified DNA or protein, for which we can use traceability and labelling.
The second category contains products made from genetically modified organisms but which do not contain DNA or protein or differ in any other way from conventional products.
However, if we treat equal products unequally as regards labelling, then we make them unequal and they fare differently on the market and, of course, they distort prices and mislead consumers, who will probably end up paying more.
This sort of approach therefore leads to distortion on the market, confuses consumers and, basically results in fraud because labelling cannot be verified and the truth of what is stated on the label cannot be checked scientifically.
So I think it is perfectly clear that the Commission proposal is so contradictory, especially now that it has been amended by the Committee on the Environment that, if we accept the principles contained in it, we shall abolish any scientific basis or logic and end up labelling food on the basis of political convictions or ideological perceptions.
Animals, for example, that eat GMO products for 10 days or 20 days will have their meat, milk, butter and cheese labelled; that is the logical consequence of the Commission proposal.
Consequently, I believe that the European Commission has submitted this proposal to us under pressure to lift the moratorium.
The proposal is totally impracticable.
It offers no legal certainty because no authority with jurisdiction, such as the courts, will accept it.
Consequently, my proposal to combine traceability and labelling with the principle of determining and tracing genetically modified DNA and protein is the only proposal which can be applied in practice to products made from genetically modified organisms and ensure, with the help of scientific analysis, that the regulation is applied.
Mr President, that was not the position taken by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and it is unfortunate that Mr Trakatellis has not kept to the usual practice of presenting the Committee' on the Environment's report, but has, regrettably, reproduced his own position.
I find that very annoying and regrettable, and ask you, Mr President, to see to it in future that rapporteurs represent the position of their committee.
If they are unable to do that, they should give the report back to somebody else, rather than present their personal opinion as the committee's position.
In all honesty, that was not exactly a point of order, Mrs Breyer!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the proposed regulation on which I am the rapporteur concerns the authorisation and labelling of genetically modified food and feed, and should of course be regarded as closely connected with the regulation on traceability.
Like many others, including the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, I welcome the Commission proposal on the future scope of labelling equivalent products, that is products made from genetically modified ingredients, where the genetic change in the end product is no longer in evidence.
That is a great advance in Community lawmaking, and one that responds to the desires of consumers over many years.
This change will also lead to the labelling of a range of foods which do not at present have to be labelled.
Current laws stipulate that oil can consist of 100% genetically modified maize without needing to be labelled as such.
The traceability system makes such labelling possible.
As we have just seen, discussions are carried on as if this were the first piece of legislation giving consumers information evidence for the value of which is not capable of being provided by processes of analysis, but the EU already has legislation, such as the required indication of origin for many foods, for example fruit and vegetables, that are founded on documents, which are an effective traceability system.
In order to ensure maximum freedom of choice for consumers, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy also calls for the labelling of animal products and enzymes.
Having, albeit from outside, followed discussions in the Council, we are under no illusions: it is highly unlikely that this will form part of this piece of legislation.
However, I really do think it necessary to continue with policy discussions on these issues and see what ripples arise when we throw some stones in.
The one thing that is clear is that this item of legislation will certainly not lay to rest the issue of whether enzymes and animal products have to be labelled.
Together with the labelling issue, there have always been discussions as to whether products should be certified as being "not genetically engineered", and I have said that I could accept this as a supplement, but never as an alternative.
This particular topic gave rise to discussions in the Committee on the Environment, in which members said they would send back what the Commission had submitted, and wanted only a "not genetically engineered" label.
The Commission proposal envisages a threshold value for contamination that is technically unavoidable and occurs by chance.
No doubt we are all agreed that such a threshold value is needed.
It has to be made clear at this point that this threshold value applies specifically to technically unavoidable contamination of this kind.
It is often asserted, and I have read in numerous newspaper articles, that the European Union is now deciding to require labelling only above 0.5% or even 1%, which is of course nonsense.
Neither I nor the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy find it acceptable that such threshold values should also apply to those GMOs that are not permitted in the Community.
As regards the amount of the threshold value, I hope that the majority of the whole House will support Amendments Nos 162 to 164, which my group has introduced and which lay down a threshold value of 0.5%, requiring also that the threshold value should be lower if progress in science and technology so permits.
The Committee has adopted two further points that I have again brought up, which have to do with the centralisation of the authorisation procedure, but also with the role to be played by the national authorities, especially in relation to environmental impact assessments, which the Commission proposal stipulates should in future be carried out by the European Food Safety Authority.
I do not consider this to be adequate and, not wishing to nullify the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified plants, which was enacted as recently as 2001, want to leave the responsibility for this in the hands of the competent authorities in the Member States.
Several of my amendments, furthermore, concern themselves with strengthening the public's right to information, and I hope that the great majority in the plenary will support these as the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has done.
Mr President, Commissioner, we are dealing with a very complicated matter.
Although the opinion of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy submitted to the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy would appear to be fairly unanimous, several points were resolved by just one vote.
We could say the Committee was divided into two, with those in the minority able to see, to their immense satisfaction, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy represent their position more closely than the opinion of their own Committee.
The manipulation of genes results in species and varieties which do not occur naturally.
Nobody can know what will happen when genetically modified organisms are introduced into the natural environment.
They might hybridise with natural varieties, or something may be produced that was not intended when the genes were manipulated.
One has to exercise excessive caution.
It is only reasonable to insist that all genetically manipulated organisms must be able to be traced retrospectively to an adequate extent.
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety required the identity of GMOs to be specified.
The Committee on Industry voices more the views of the producers and does not want this.
It is furthermore in the interests of consumers that they should be allowed to choose the food they eat, and they have a right to do so.
For that reason we are proposing that it should be compulsory to label GMO products as such.
On that basis consumers can avoid products they do not wish to use.
When the Committee on Industry voted, a position that differs from the Commission's original proposal won by a narrow margin.
It is the Committee's opinion that labelling should be carried out in such a way that a product is labelled when it is GM-free and not when it contains genetically modified organisms.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted a different position on this from the Committee on Industry, and its views are probably a better response to the need for an increase in consumer choice.
Mr President, we are examining two reports, one on traceability and labelling of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms and the other on genetically modified food and feed.
These matters must be resolved in order to put an end to the Council moratorium on genetically modified organisms.
It is no easy task to reconcile the different priorities that must be taken into consideration - first, consumers right to information; secondly, the priority of health and the environment; and thirdly, the functioning of the internal market - and yet this is essential.
It leaves me speechless, however, to hear things like genes entering the environment.
The truth, ladies and gentlemen, is that a little more rigour in the interventions would not go amiss.
I am not aware of any gene that has escaped in this way and flown out into the environment.
We need to be rigorous and serious, we need to adopt the two proposals made by the Commission, which I think are quite reasonable, and try to adapt our proposal to what the market and consumers need.
The first priority has to be keeping consumers informed and giving them the ability to choose.
The second priority must be a health guarantee.
The third priority is that we must always respect the freedom of the internal market and require of third countries what we are prepared to require of ourselves.
We cannot have separate legislation and our consumers cannot be inundated with unlabelled genetically modified organisms from other countries because we are incapable of imposing our legislation on the international bodies.
Mr President, I know that I am exceeding my time limit, but please allow me a little flexibility, as no other Members from my Group are going to speak.
I would also like to say that labelling does not mean greater safety.
Nor do I believe that it is the responsibility of Parliament, as a political parliament, to lay down a standard stipulating 0.5% or 0.3%.
It should be a management committee that sets this parameter, which must be quantifiable.
Lastly, ?
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, Commissioners, the Environment Committee took on board a large number of amendments proposed by the Legal Affairs Committee, as is only right and proper, as these amendments do away with ambiguities.
Amendment No 22, which is put in more precise terms, is an example, stating that committee procedures only come into play when the scope of this regulation is to be extended to new products, and under no circumstances to the contrary.
I think that clarifications of this sort are always welcome.
Another issue is the coherence of the legislation, and we should in any case avoid the laboriously achieved compromises of the past, in the novel food regulation and the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified plants, being nullified by new regulations which are currently being put before us.
Thirdly, this has to do with the public's legitimate entitlement to have access to information.
Consumers will only have grown up if we continue to offer them transparency and openness.
Here in Parliament, we talk a great deal about freedom, transparency and solidarity.
Let us turn these words into deeds, so that the public has freedom of choice about what they want to eat and about what they want to regard as unsaleable goods; let us do this by getting clear product labelling accepted.
This of course also involves the threshold value issue, and you will be aware that the Legal Affairs Committee has not been able to come to any conclusion about this.
Various very diverse proposals having been put to the Committee, when these amendments were withdrawn, it was commented that the Committee on the Environment had a better overview of this issue, but I do not want to draw a veil over the fact that I continue to consider a threshold value of 0.1% worth striving for.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, why do we need genetically modified plants?
If we modify a few genetic building blocks, plants are apparently better adapted to adverse environmental influences, such as attacks by pests or competition from weeds.
They become more resistant.
Far fewer herbicides and insecticides are needed.
There is less environmental pollution.
From the point of view of quality and nutritional value, genetically modified foods are absolutely identical to conventional foods.
That is guaranteed through comprehensive testing.
There are widely differing views in Parliament on the present Commission proposals on traceability and labelling.
We know that.
But we are all agreed on one point: the proposals have been poorly dealt with.
We fail to understand why the Commission has no wish to include everything in a single regulation.
A comprehensive, uniform regulation could then have included seed, which at present - and again we fail to understand why - is handled under the comitology procedure, thereby more or less excluding Parliament.
However, these shortcomings notwithstanding, we have no desire to reject the Commission proposals because any further delay would be very bad for the status of genetically modified products within the EU and the de facto moratorium which has applied for several years would remain in place.
The purpose of the Commission's two proposals is to guarantee that consumers have clear, truthful information about genetically modified organisms in food and feed.
Of course, I too am unreservedly in favour of comprehensive information for consumers.
That goes without saying.
But we can only achieve this sort of information if we make sure that only products that really contain GMOs are labelled as such, with the need for scientific proof, with genetically modified DNA or protein or perhaps other new analytical methods in the future, as our prime requirement.
This sort of product-related labelling is the only feasible way forward.
The Commission proposal is barking up the wrong tree here.
So-called process-based labelling of food and feed, with no facility to prove genetic modification in the end product is simply not practicable and is inviting fraud.
Europe would be inundated with a flood of supposed scandals and consumer confidence in our high quality food - and it is high quality - would be shaken even further, and needlessly so.
For the same reason, then, we should reject the idea of extending labelling requirements to animal products such as meat, eggs and milk products from animals which have come into contact with genetically modified feed at some point.
This sort of labelling requirement would be just as perplexing as a labelling requirement for food produced using genetically produced or modified aids such as enzymes because, in both cases, the food itself is not genetically modified in any way and is no different from conventional produce.
Exactly the same applies to highly refined products such as edible oils or sugar.
There is demonstrably no longer any genetic modification in the product.
So why label it?
This sort of procedure, labelling every product which has no more than glanced at a GMO, would run counter to the idea of consumer enlightenment and information.
Nearly every food product would have to be labelled "manufactured using or from GMOs".
Another key question is the threshold for the accidental or technically unavoidable presence of GMOs in products.
In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, the threshold value for the accidental and technically unavoidable presence of GMOs was reduced from the 1% in the Commission proposal to 0.5%.
The PPE-DE group voted against this, although we are all agreed that this threshold value is a purely political value and has no scientific basis.
However, even as a political value, it has to have a practicable, a feasible basis.
And, with a lower limit of 1%, the feasibility threshold is more than satisfied.
A threshold value of 0.5% simply cannot be complied with at present.
It would be a blocking value, a blocking threshold.
However, on this point, and this too has to be said, the Commission proposal was very poorly formulated.
Of course it will generate unease if there is talk of banning GMOs in the EU.
It smacks of selling out.
Basically, this threshold is a necessary tolerance value, especially in the transition phase, for GMOs which, because of the de facto moratorium, may not yet have been licensed but which have certainly been tested in the EU by the relevant scientific committees and have proven to be harmless to human health and the environment.
They are ready to be licensed; they are in a holding pattern.
The term we should be using is "preauthorised" and I for one shall endeavour to get this term adopted in the legislation.
Mr President, the two draft regulations and reports we are debating today are important supplements to the Directive on the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment, which we adopted last year.
Rules on traceability and labelling are obviously vital, partly so that effective quality control can be carried out but also so that products can be withdrawn from the market if unforeseen damage to our health or the environment should occur and, finally, so that consumers, as consumers, can also be given a real choice between GM and non-GM products.
I am therefore able fully to support the policy of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, designed to ensure that we obtain an effective system of traceability and that, as consumers, we are given a free choice.
We are to be informed as to whether a product consists of, or contains, genetically modified organisms and we are also to be informed as to whether a product has been made from genetically modified organisms.
That also applies, of course, to animal products such as milk, eggs and meat from animals fed on GM products.
As consumers, we are obviously entitled to be informed both about the content of the foods we consume and about the methods used to produce them.
I am also in favour of the limit for unintentional pollution by genetically modified organisms being set as low as it possibly can be, and at no higher than 0.5%.
Allow me now to make an observation about the multinational chemical concerns behind GM products, as well as about the British Government which is, of course, adopting the extraordinary position that there must be no labelling, except for businesses' being allowed to label their products GM-free.
That would of course be a disastrous solution.
The first reason for this is that companies would probably not make very much use of the scheme, for it would of course be voluntary.
Not very many firms would make use of it solely as a way of behaving responsibly.
The second reason, however, is that such a scheme would leave consumers completely in the lurch.
All products not labelled GM-free could of course be either GM or non-GM products.
The scheme would not provide consumers with the relevant information, and that is of course also the intention behind the chemical industry's wishes.
Finally, it would become completely impossible to trace genetically modified organisms if there were no positive labelling of these at all the stages of production and distribution.
There would then of course be no possibility of tracing genetically modified organisms which might have proved to have had harmful effects on our health or on the environment.
In the light of history, one can only wonder at, in particular, the British Government's going in for a scheme that interferes with traceability in the area of foodstuffs.
I simply do not understand industry's marketing strategy for GM products.
It argues the whole time in favour of giving consumers as little information as possible.
Does it really believe that confidence in genetically manipulated foodstuffs can be created in that way?
That, of course, makes no sense at all, and all I can say, therefore, is that, as a result, I well appreciate the response of the large majority of European consumers.
As a result of their constantly encountering the attitude that consumers should know as little as possible, they lack confidence in these products.
Mr President, this is a little reminiscent of a Greek tragedy: whichever option you take, it always has a bad ending.
I think we are facing one such tragedy.
The goal, on which we are all agreed, is clear.
Consumers must have the choice: either with GMO or without, and the label must guide them in a clear and reliable manner.
In that respect, we have to make a judgment to some extent on the basis of evidence on paper.
We must develop a system which we can rely on, which does not necessarily involve scientific tests alone.
Our group does not want to label processing aids.
We are still in discussion about products from animals that were fed GMOs at some stage.
However, if we include these two aspects, then we will have to label just about everything, and I wonder whether we are helping the consumer in this way.
Will he still be able to see the wood for the trees?
This is why we call for a system of non-GMOs, which is, in fact, already being used as a sales point by a number of distribution chains.
The key problem we will be facing in respect of paper evidence will be fraud.
In my view, if we do not set up a sound and reliable system - since we are mainly dealing with countries outside of the Union - then we had better brace ourselves for the first scandal.
As for the threshold value, my group will be endorsing 0.5% or lower for accidental presence.
The Eurostat figures clearly show that most consumers want effective labelling.
Should we, however, follow the Commission's system?
Does it provide the necessary guarantees for checking paper evidence in a number of products in total trade?
Are we then certain that we will have a really good label?
My second question is, if we introduce maximum labelling, so including enzymes and animal products, will we not start labelling nearly every single product, and does this benefit the consumer at all?
In my view, the best combination is a non-GMO label along with a label which features a GMO for products in which these are present.
This system is not watertight either, nor perfect, but I think that my version of the Greek tragedy will claim the least number of victims.
Mr President, the issue of genetically modified crops and food can be viewed from several different angles.
For our group, the important factors are biodiversity, the environment, health and food safety. It is also a question of consumers' fundamental right to be able to choose what they buy and what they eat.
In addition, the issue can be viewed in terms of power.
The power over our food and crops lies to a large extent with multinational companies which sometimes sell genetically modified seeds which are directly dependent on their own pesticides.
All these reasons may explain why consumers wish to choose something other than GM products.
There is no scientific agreement on the benefits of GM technology in the area of food.
The technology is controversial and our knowledge of the field is growing rapidly.
In particular, there is uncertainty regarding the impact on biodiversity and possible effects for people with allergies.
Therefore, the precautionary principle must be applied, and we support Member States' right to impose a moratorium on the commercial growing of GM crops.
When the Commission has acted to modernise the European Union's policy in this area, regulations for traceability, labelling and corporate responsibility have formed the basis for the policy.
We believe that, in line with this and as a minimum requirement, no commercial growing of GM crops should be allowed before these changes have been made and introduced into national legislation.
In terms of labelling and traceability, the starting point must be the creation of a comprehensive system which provides consumers with the right to choose.
This means that goods produced with the help of GM products, such as meat produced with GM feed, must also be labelled.
The addition of remains from proscribed GM products must naturally also not be allowed.
With regard to the unintentional addition of remains from GM crops, the threshold should be as low as possible.
We believe that the proposal of 0.5 percent is far too high, but it may be a starting point for future reductions.
It is remarkable that those who usually defend consumers' freedom of choice in the market now do not wish to provide consumers with this freedom through the effective labelling of GM food.
Could it be the case that people realise that most consumers would exercise their freedom of choice by not choosing GM products?
A labelling system for GM-free products would be a considerably worse solution than that currently proposed.
Such a system is based on the assumption that genetically modified food is the rule and that GM-free food is the exception.
We would like to see the reverse assumption prevailing.
We know that on this issue there is strong pressure from industry and from certain national governments to vote against the line taken by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
I would appeal to Members of this House to accept their responsibility for the environment and consumers and to support the line taken on this issue by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and not to give in either to industry or to 10 Downing Street.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, tomorrow's vote in this House will be a test of whether we want to create more consumer transparency or whether we prefer to defer to industry's interests and keep palming consumers off with genetically modified food on the quiet.
To fail to adopt comprehensive labelling and, as a result, more detailed traceability, would be a declaration of consumer policy bankruptcy on the part of Parliament and subservience to the interests of genetic engineering.
To allow traceability and transparency to fail would be to trample consumers' rights underfoot, which is why I call on the PPE-DE group in particular to relinquish its blocking stance, to take the consumers' side at long last and to stop treating them like children.
It is totally unacceptable for cold-pressed oil or tomatoes to be labelled, because the proof is there, while as soon as the same oil is heated or as soon as the same tomatoes are made into ketchup, they need no longer be labelled.
We need comprehensive labelling because consumers have a right to know what they are eating.
The market - i.e. consumers - should be allowed to decide.
We really have to look on them as responsible adults and we must not, under any circumstances, treat them like children.
We have known - since the BSE scandal at least - that consumers want to know what animals are being fed and how.
Naturally we are categorically opposed to a threshold for unlicensed genetically modified food, because that would really push the Commission's objective of greater food safety ad absurdum.
Only expressly licensed products should be marketed.
Anything else would be totally unacceptable and would turn food legislation on its head.
Even the 1% value for licensed products would appear to be much too high and far too arbitrary for our liking.
It would mean that an average shipload of non-genetically engineered soya beans could still contain over 3 000 tonnes of genetically engineered beans.
The Commission must submit more safety measures to prevent contamination because what we need is more labelling and more consumer safety.
Mr President, we are not totally against GMOs and their use.
However, we are in favour of their use being regulated, as, moreover, the international situation demands: 50 million hectares of land are cultivated in the world using GMOs compared with only 12 000 hectares in Europe.
This should prompt us to investigate the state of European research, and the role of Europe in the WTO and the - often unregulated, uncontrolled - use of products containing GMOs in developing countries.
Similarly, it should draw attention to the importance of safeguarding biodiversity and of providing guarantees and ensuring consumer safety, for science is not yet able to do this with certainty.
However, this is not the right occasion for this.
What disturbs us, however, about the proposals before us and the related work of the rapporteurs is some of the ways the principles of the Cartagena Protocol are supposed to be interpreted.
Indeed, it would appear that precautions and transparency, which are the basic elements of the Protocol, are to be interpreted in a way which, at times, even distorts their meaning, especially if we read the second regulation, the regulation on traceability and labelling.
There is no trace of a uniform method guaranteeing that operators have taken all the steps necessary to avoid contamination, nor is there a requirement for an authority certifying that these measures have been carried out, nor, moreover, is there consistency between the levels of contamination permitted.
The same may be said of the samples to be deposited together with the authorisation application, it being left to the discretion of the applicants for the authorisation whether to take a sample or not.
Moreover, it would not appear appropriate to require economic operators to provide evidence of the quality of scientific tests, which, moreover, would be a unilateral requirement since not even the Cartagena Protocol gives any significant consideration to the issue of accountability, putting off any analysis even of the principles until after 4 years from the Protocol's entry into force.
Again, if the objective is traceability, as far as the precautionary principle is concerned, we fail to understand why an authorisation granted has to be valid for 10 years under one regulation while, under the other regulation, the supporting documentation only has to be retained for five years.
We hope, with regard to the work carried out by the rapporteurs and, in particular, Mrs Scheele, who has, nevertheless, succeeded in improving the Commission's proposal, that the points giving cause for concern will be amended, so that consistency which is at least functional can be achieved.
In the debate about genetically modified organisms, we cannot confine ourselves to technical discussions; the ethical aspects need to be brought to the fore.
We are allowed to use God's creation to meet our food requirements, but that does not mean that we can harm the individuality of life around us.
The firms involved, however, claim that biotechnology is needed to solve the food shortage.
However, the problem is not that there is insufficient food, but that it is not distributed effectively.
Moreover, a lack of finances is often the reason why people have no food.
If we consider the famine in the southern countries of Africa, it is evident that these problems cannot be solved by means of biotechnology.
Last year, we approved a directive which provided for the conditional introduction onto the market of genetically modified food.
The conditions are: protection of the environment and health, freedom of choice for the consumer and 'the polluter pays'.
If the industry is unable to meet these conditions, we need to abandon the marketing of genetically modified food.
My point of concern is that, despite the strict labelling conditions, real freedom of choice is not guaranteed.
Unintentional contamination will always occur.
Moreover, I take the view that GMO-free products should not be more expensive than GMO products.
Mr President, when we vote on the Scheele and Trakatellis reports on genetically modified products, we have a duty to contribute to defining a credible safety strategy for genetically modified food in order to restore the power of political discourse in this area.
As far as the scope of the proposed legislation is concerned, we believe that labelling must be applied to GMOs and their products in food and feed, and that this must be based on the full traceability of GMOs, without being limited to the detectability criteria of genetically modified DNA, so as to comply fully with the precautionary principle.
We reject, on the other hand, the amendments that seek to promote 'non GMO' or 'GM free' labelling since this measure would impose additional manufacturing costs on the 'GM free' sector.
As for unauthorised GMOs in the European Union, we recommend 'zero' tolerance.
It would be contradictory to strengthen the GMO authorisation procedure, on the one hand, and to agree to the presence of unauthorised GMOs in foodstuffs on the other.
In relation to the labelling exemption threshold for adventitious release of GMOs authorised in Europe, we support the 0.5% threshold.
We are not losing sight of the fact, however, that since the identification of GM products is problematic, the very existence of a threshold poses a problem.
This type of ambiguity, which is exclusive to the debate on GMOs, must be resolved urgently within our societies, whose citizens are, increasingly, making up their own minds in the light of fears and threats, to the point where these have now become more influential than the notion of risk itself.
Mr President, the debate on GMOs has often generated more confusion than clarity.
This is obviously what is happening here this evening.
We must refrain from taking any spectacular initiatives to attract the media's attention and instead encourage a pragmatic and scientific approach to the subject in order to set aside any emotional pressures or considerations.
Too much of the unfounded criticism of GMOs disregards this scientific approach.
Let us keep in mind that genetic engineering has enabled us to make significant advances and progress in the field of pharmaceuticals, for example.
We should not allow research to be hindered in such a way.
On the other hand, we must ensure that food and feed does not present any risk to human health, animal welfare or the environment and that the use of genetically modified organisms does not present these types of risks.
We must protect consumers against any possible danger, speak openly of the advantages and drawbacks of GMOs by explaining to consumers the risks to which we would be exposed by turning our back on this technology.
However, safety remains the most important ingredient in our food.
Therefore, GM experimentation must be carried out in accordance with the principle of 'step-by-step' scientific validation, on the basis of homogeneous and centralised criteria, and provide the greatest possible transparency in terms of both the conditions governing this experimentation and the results obtained.
Having 15 different authorisation systems merely adds to the confusion, in an area where we actually need harmonisation.
I would therefore like to express some concerns arising from certain proposals put forward in these reports.
I reiterate that our credibility depends on the texts that we pass and the realistic measures resulting from them.
We know that food contamination or the adventitious presence of GM material is possible, but we must still be able to detect this accurately.
The scientific community recommends a threshold of 1% and casts grave doubts upon the ability to bring this threshold down to 0.5% and this does indeed seem unrealistic and impossible at this point in time.
Since the specified threshold for determining the presence of GMOs must be realistic, this question naturally brings us to the issue of labelling.
To say to consumers that we can guarantee food is GM-free would amount to deception.
Introducing this policy naturally requires strengthening of scientific validation, controls and applicable penalties.
I hope that the European Union will inform consumers as fully as possible in order to give them genuine freedom of choice, and that it communicates to them credible information on GMOs, particularly by means of labelling that is clear and easy to read, unambiguous but not excessively so, in other words based on a system which requires complete and reliable information on the presence of GMOs and their derivatives, based on the detectability and on the analysis of genetically modified DNA and protein.
To now attempt to extend this requirement to the labelling of food obtained from animals fed with GMOs poses a problem and may confuse information.
In order to be effective, the two reports before us must be homogeneous.
Yet, I am concerned about the lack of cohesion which might result from the vote on these two texts.
What will we do if both reports deviate from a common guideline?
How will we explain this deviation to the public?
How will we apply these measures which, ultimately, will be impossible to apply?
Mr President, I welcome the Commission proposal.
It is a genuine and honest attempt to try to meet the demands of the public with regard to this issue.
The rapporteur's reports have been a genuine attempt to improve that proposal.
It means that we are a step closer to having proper and rational use of GM technology within Europe.
I hope it is a step closer to getting the moratorium lifted so that we can start to approve new GM products which will be of benefit to all and utilise the new legislation, of which I was the author last year.
It gives much higher protection than the legislation which is currently used in the crop trials now taking place in the European Union.
We have to continue to ask questions.
Is this really giving the public what they want?
When members of the public contact me, by email, postcard, telephone or personally, they do not say "please give us the chance to eat food that contains less than 1% GMO".
They say "please give us the chance to choose to eat food that has no GMO in it, that is GMO-free, so that we can make a genuine choice between GMO and no GMO".
I do not believe this proposal does that.
It will label food that contains a substantial quantity of GMO, but it will leave on the shelf in the supermarket many different substances and products that are not labelled, but that contain GMO.
The public will be misled; the public will be confused; the public will again not have confidence and trust in the labelling systems that we propose for their benefit in this House.
We have to think again.
I doubt whether this proposal, in its present form, unless it is well amended, is going to be of positive benefit to the public.
We have to tell people the truth about what is in their food.
Ninety-nine percent of the truth is not honest; it is not good enough; it is not the necessary 100%.
Mr President, concerns about the effects of GMOs on human health are in the minds of many of us overshadowed by doubts about their effects upon other species of plants or animal life and about the control of the world's seed bank by a handful of companies.
But it is animal and human health which is the issue before us and the ELDR Group is united in its belief that products need to be clearly labelled so that consumers can make proper choices.
We are, however, divided about the clearest way of achieving this result.
A majority accept the Commission proposals but want products with more than 0.5% of GMOs or less if practicable, to be labelled as such.
Traceability rules should be established so that this is done even when the presence of GMO DNA cannot be identified.
But we risk overwhelming the consumer if we label every foodstuff made from products derived from animals fed on GMOs.
I am opposed to steps being taken which will eventually lead only to GMO-free or to non-GMO products being labelled if such a thing is possible, because this will result in normal foods being classified as special and transfer the burden of proof and costs away from GMO producers.
We may have to do this eventually but not yet.
GM crops have the potential to bring major benefits, but they also pose threats to the environment.
Rules for trade are needed, but I will not be sorry if consumer preference slows the pace of GMO development and allows us more time to assess the full consequences of their use.
Mr President, today's debate is not about whether genetically modified food is good or bad or dangerous to our health, despite the fact that there is of course good reason to suspect that it may be.
Today's debate is about ensuring that consumers have the right to know and to choose between the products on sale to them.
In order to do this, products need an identity and they need some sort of label to state their identity.
Today, we have the technology to ensure that this identity corresponds to the product's actual history, what materials have been used to produce it and how it has been produced.
So I am against any amendments designed to restrict the traceability of genetically modified organisms and to restrict it to the final form of the product, whereas with the Commission's proposals we could have a system which gives us more information at all stages of production and hence a more accurate, more complex picture of the origin of the final product.
If we want even rudimentary prevention and freedom of information and consumer choice, we need to support the Commission's basic proposals and reinforce its approach. We, as a Parliament, must not take a more conservative position which might leave us open to accusations of adopting a position which allows information to be concealed.
For me, this support includes the need to trace genetically modified organisms - including of course in animal feed - and I should like to add that a limit of 1% seems rather high to me for random contamination.
I have learned and heard that 0.1% is possible and I see no reason why we too should not adopt this.
Finally, I should like to ask the Commission this: it has introduced a concentrated control system, mainly under the principle of food safety.
However, for numerous reasons and the games which some people may play, we should I think give the national authorities strong powers of control, perhaps under a system of provisional licences.
Mr President, these reports are about allowing people the choice whether or not to eat GM food.
The only way to do that is with an effective labelling and traceability scheme that will tell consumers exactly what they want to know, which is whether the food or feed is being produced using GMOs.
That means labelling food and feed that contain GMOs or have been produced with GMOs, so that when people pick up a packet or a tin in a shop, they can see if this is a GM product or not.
That effect would not be achieved with a GM-free label.
Apart from the difficulty of ensuring that products are 100% GM-free, why should we put all of the responsibility, expense and inconvenience on to those who do not use GMOs?
That would push up the price of GM-free goods and put them out of the reach of many consumers.
Those who use GMOs should have the legal obligation to label and to take all steps necessary to avoid contaminating conventional or organic produce.
Talking about thresholds for adventitious or accidental contamination but then making those who do not use GMOs responsible for meeting those thresholds contradicts the 'polluter pays' principle.
We should reject any threshold for unauthorised GMOs, which should not be allowed to reach the market.
In the case of approved GMOs, however, we should accept only the lowest achievable tolerance level.
This means that the most recent state of science and technology will be taken into account.
I know from the response from my own constituents that consumers are extremely concerned about this issue and are strongly in favour of the traceability and labelling of GM food and animal feed.
I also know that many major voluntary organisations, consumer organisations and supermarkets strongly support this kind of scheme.
I hope that tomorrow this Parliament will adopt a stringent scheme to give consumers the real choice and the confidence that they are demanding of us.
Mr President, we are in more or less the same position with the debate on the use of genetically modified food as we were 25 years ago with the debate on nuclear power.
Numerous studies confirm it is perfectly safe, but we have to assume that most of these studies were funded by the industries which stand to gain from genetic engineering.
Recognised researchers in Scotland, on the other hand, for example Professor Pusztai, have found during experiments that genetically engineered potatoes, for example, cause serious damage to the animals' health.
Basically, letting consumers decide for themselves if they want to eat genetically modified food is a problem, because even highly educated people know very little about the possible side effects.
Labelling requirements should therefore be applied on a highly restrictive basis and the threshold value should be kept as low as possible.
Mr President, the line which prevailed in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, thanks, in particular, to the excellent work of our rapporteur, reiterates the need for the particularly rigorous traceability and labelling system proposed by the Commission.
The Union's primary duty is to guarantee maximum security at all the different stages in the production and distribution chain and provide accurate information on the foodstuffs placed on the market.
It is then up to the consumer to choose whether or not to buy genetically modified food.
However, this freedom of choice presupposes a rigorous, unambiguous labelling system which informs the consumer whether products contain genetically modified organisms, whether they are composed of genetically modified organisms, and also whether they have been derived from GMOs or whether GMOs have been used as processing aids.
The European People's Party's attempt to repropose in plenary the line already overthrown in the Environment Committee must be firmly rejected.
Indeed, just labelling foods or feedingstuffs in which tests have revealed the presence of modified DNA or protein, overthrowing the Commission's line, would be paving the way for a sort of colonisation of the European agrifoods system.
We are not just talking about the potential health risk or the principle of transparency towards consumers: we are also and, perhaps, above all, talking about the safeguarding of conventional and organic food production.
This might seem an exaggeration, but tomorrow's vote is important for European citizens: on the one hand, we can and must do something to banish their feeling of insecurity, and, on the other, we can and must reinforce the ideal of the Europe of diversities, which can do so much to further its quest for unity.
Mr President, it is good that we now have a couple of directives aimed at labelling genetically modified organisms.
However, I believe that they have come too late by around 10-15 years, as GMOs are already being used in the production of a very large proportion of our food.
When people started to grow crops and domesticate animals around ten thousand years ago, they also started refining natural properties.
Now we are able not only to choose between different types of plant and individual plants but also to choose the characteristics of the individual plant.
It is the same aim we have had for thousands of years, but we have new methods.
I profess that I believe in science, I believe in this technology and I believe that we should use our knowledge, but we must be aware that new knowledge always means new risks and requires increased caution.
These are two important areas to be considered in this context, public health and possible threats to the environment.
Many people are concerned.
We have reason to take these concerns seriously.
The consumer requires labelling, and the consumer is always right.
We as politicians must take our responsibility. If one takes the environmental aspect seriously, which, in contrast to Mr Trakatellis, I do, all food must be labelled, including in those cases where GMOs cannot be detected and where they have only been used to assist production.
I therefore fully support the proposal of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
I also support a number of the amendments proposed by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance which go one step further.
I believe it is extremely important that we who believe in the technology are also honest.
Mr President, the traceability of foods from the field to the supermarket shelf is a must.
At the same time, there must be a voluntary quality assurance procedure for producers, which offers our millions of consumers high safety standards.
Unfortunately, the procedure used in the Member States is too disparate and too unclear.
Without strict controls there will be no way of preventing all forms of abusive labelling.
Consumers want natural foods and are against the use of any technology in the production of food.
Labelling and traceability do not automatically guarantee safety.
The greatest danger lies in the procedure for licensing genetically modified organisms in the food chain in the Community, if this contradicts the general product standards laid down in WTO rules.
The Commission's plans for reforming the CAP are proliferating daily.
The planned amendments are a challenge to the Member States' right of codetermination and to their interest groups.
And farming is being turned into a sort of employment agency, with administration and control systems gaining in importance over good, professional practice.
The new size reductions required are yet another political blunder and are therefore unacceptable.
This report looks a long way into the future and so should a reform.
I shall focus my comments on two important aspects of the Commission's proposals, which, overall, are heading in the right direction.
There are still a number of shortcomings, however, which, in my opinion, could have been remedied by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, and I hope that the House will support this committee's proposals.
The two points I wish to make are, first of all, the introduction of a 1% tolerance threshold for unauthorised GMOs, regardless of whether their presence is adventitious or technically unavoidable.
This is totally inconsistent since, if it is a question of an unauthorised GMO, it should not be present in our food.
This is a proposal which promotes fraud and which is a flagrant violation of the spirit and the letter of Directive 2001/18/EC, which was adopted last year.
It is therefore unacceptable.
The second important point relates to the problem of co-existence between GM cultures and non-GM cultures.
To deal with this problem by setting contamination thresholds is a totally inadequate approach.
It is important to deal with the fundamental problem, namely that of the legal liability of operators.
Farmers who are growing or will grow GM crops must clearly ensure that they take all the necessary measures to avoid contamination of conventional products and organic products.
It is the 'polluter pays' principle that must be applied and this is the case with an approach such as this.
I therefore hope that tomorrow's vote will achieve this.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in my view, it would be particularly limiting to think that the two reports before us today only pose food safety problems.
The real challenges involved in genetic modifications are ethical and environmental.
Ethical, since the manipulation of chromosomal information explores limits other than those that are technically possible; environmental, because, by introducing foreign genes into cultivated plants, we are deliberately running the risk of spreading undesirable genes amongst wild plant life.
I am fully aware that genetic engineering is opening up new possibilities for improving cultivated plants compared to those offered by traditional plant selection methods.
Research must, of course, continue but the question as to how far we can go in playing the sorcerer's apprentice with the very core of a living being must, at some point, be raised.
We must note that, so far, the benefits of GMOs have been much more tangible for American seed firms than for farmers or consumers.
Consumers, farmers and citizens feel extremely reticent towards GMOs and legislators must understand this.
With regard to industry, legislators must set limits that the industry must respect and ensure that these limits are imposed just as strictly to products imported from third countries as to food produced in the European Union.
With regard to consumers, legislators must demand labelling of doses that can be efficiently measured as accurately as possible, in accordance with scientific knowledge.
Mr President, I am pleased that today's debate has been framed as a joint debate on issues of food and feed safety.
While the very mention of the term "GMO" is enough to grab media attention, it is important that we put things in perspective.
We are dealing with this matter as part of a general concern for the welfare of consumers against a background of recent scares related to food and animal feeds.
I believe it is important to get away from the emotive aspects of the debate and focus on our role as European legislators, which is to guarantee consumers that we have put a legal framework in place that guarantees the best quality and the safest products.
In addition, they should have the clearest and fullest information about every food product they consume so that they can make informed choices.
It is important that legislators listen to all sides and get the balance right, guided by the unassailable principle of safe food for our citizens.
In this respect I believe the Commission has, on the whole, made a very balanced proposal.
There must be labelling and transparency.
There must be guidelines regarding ingredients.
I am unable to support a series of amendments that seek to go further than is necessary.
Many of the amendments adopted in committee would place the European agriculture industry at a considerable disadvantage vis-à-vis our trading partners, not to mention running the risk of falling foul of our WTO commitments.
At the end of the day we should avoid complications that bring no tangible benefit to our consumers and only give ammunition to those who argue that the EU creates burdensome over-regulation.
Providing full information means that consumers have choice.
If consumers wish to purchase food derived from animals which were not fed on GM feed, then they can do so via the organic route.
Let us face reality and base our decisions on scientific considerations.
In the future it is likely that more and more animal feed will be derived from GM crops.
I believe that the safeguards are in place to guarantee that these feedstuffs will all have been tried and tested before they enter the food chain.
If a consumer decides to avoid such products, that is his or her right.
It is our responsibility to provide them with the information to make this choice.
It would be wrong to give in to attempts to demonise GM foods and feedstuffs.
Let us listen to sound scientific advice and trust in our own food safety system, which I believe is second to none.
Mr President, biotechnology is at the heart of the Lisbon process to make Europe the world's most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy.
In line with this ambition, biotech is top priority in the sixth framework research programme which we approved only recently.
Advances in crop biotechnology promise major benefits for our environment and consumers.
If, for a moment, we can give thought to the interests of others, they will be of incalculable benefit to those who are hungry or suffer blindness and disease in the third world.
It is therefore shameful that we bow down to the destructive agenda of Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, who are intent on bamboozling the public with unjustified scare stories.
Clearly, their purpose is to prevent all advance in this area of great scientific promise, for that is what these present texts from the Trakatellis and Scheele reports would mean.
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy understood these implications for industry, our farmers, our international trade relations, our scientific community and, yes, for our consumers.
It voted for a GM free and virtually GM-free labelling system which would be readily workable and much less bureaucratic and more consistent with consumer wishes for simple and straightforward information - much more straightforward than the present Commission proposal, let alone the absurd texts before us.
Certain Member States also would much prefer this solution.
I ask the Commission to bear in mind, when it comes to codecision, that this option has support in Parliament.
If it genuinely stands by its biotechnology action plan, it should give this option more consideration.
Indeed, I call on the Commission this afternoon to state that this option could still be open.
Ladies and gentlemen, consumers have the right to know what they eat.
If the food contains genetically modified ingredients, then this should be clearly indicated on the label.
If GMOs are used in the production process, this should also be evident.
In my view, you can take this to extremes and take the rapporteur's lead.
However, we should realise what the implications would be.
If we followed the rapporteur's proposals, at least 80% of the foodstuffs would soon have to be marked as GMO.
In addition, nearly 100% of the processed and packaged foodstuffs would receive a GMO label.
In this way, information would lose its value in terms of the choices that the consumer wishes to make.
We should also realise that we thus accord genetic modification a definite place in food production.
This is fine by me. Genetic modification may have many advantages, and I welcome the taboo on GMOs being broken, but I do have concerns.
After all, it is easy to predict that biotechnology will thus elbow out normal gen-tech-free production, which we must prevent.
This is why I call for the introduction of a 'GMO-free' label alongside the rapporteur's proposals, and I mean really GMO-free, that is to say, 0% GMOs and no use of GMOs during the production.
The GMO-free label would also encourage GMO-free production, and GMO-free areas would need to be designated, which would provide an economy of scale at the same time.
GMO-free would then remain affordable for everyone and GMO-free should not become elite food, in my view.
Consumers are entitled to choose GMO-free at affordable prices.
A second point concerns the position of third countries.
In all recent food legislation, we have made certain that imports from third countries must meet European standards.
However, third countries can always call upon equivalence.
Unfortunately, we are now threatening to adopt a different approach and make imports from third countries in practice impossible.
With this Fortress Europe approach, we are closing ourselves off from the world and are turning our backs on the developing countries.
I consider this unacceptable.
Finally, I should like to wish both rapporteurs much strength and, especially, fruitful cooperation, because I believe it is extremely difficult at the moment for Parliament to adopt a sound viewpoint.
Mr President, the Communist Party of Greece is radically opposed to the directive on the release of genetically modified organisms because we believe that, instead of safeguarding public health and the environment, it safeguards the profits of a few multinationals which, apart from anything else, will gain a stranglehold on the production of foodstuffs.
In the name of scientific development, to quote the huge multinationals in the food industry, man is attempting to intervene in the genetic codes of living organisms at a time when no one can guarantee the impact modified species will have; it is not predictable or immediately obvious and only becomes apparent once havoc has been wreaked.
Even though we consider the amendments made by the European Parliament to be extremely positive, there is a serious risk of their having extremely negative results because labels shift the responsibility for deciding if a product is suitable away from the relevant government agencies and on to the consumer, who is not always able and does not always have the knowledge needed to make that decision.
In addition, even if these proposals were to have some degree of success, the benefits would be short lived because, with contamination and the Commission proposing that products containing 1% genetically modified organisms should be considered clean, every product would be contaminated in a few years' time, especially plant products, as a result of cross-pollination.
What really frightens us is that this attempt focuses on reassuring public opinion, glossing over the risks and fostering a climate of acceptance of modified organisms.
It will benefit the multinational companies in the food sector and swell their profits, while leaving dangerous leeway for undermining public health and the equilibrium of the ecosystem.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the major challenge of this directive - and this is what the Commission desires - is to achieve clear labelling, for both food products as well as animal feed and enzymes.
We must reiterate that when we eat animals, we are eating the food that they themselves consumed.
Consumers therefore want to know, and many farmers also want to know, what animals eat.
Since, initially, I had been appointed draftsman on this issue as a member of the Committee on Agriculture, I felt obliged not to table this opinion on my behalf, such was the desire of my fellow Members - and Mrs Redondo, an inveterate productivist and defender of genetically manipulated organisms, pointed this out earlier - to confuse the debate.
I am therefore delighted to be able to support Mrs Scheele and the Committee on the Environment, who are not only demanding clear labelling but are lowering the traceability threshold to 0.5%.
Scientists are now telling us that they can detect food containing 0.01% of GMOs.
If we therefore want to give consumers clear information on what they want to know, it is indeed possible.
The second thing that we must not forget, above all else, is that the requirements must be the same for imported products, so that the consumer has reassurance on products which are from outside and on products which are produced within the European Union.
It is on this basis, and this basis alone, that we will effectively manage to reassure and to reconcile consumers and producers.
Mr President, first of all I must ask why we have two reports at all.
Is it just to suit two DGs which could not come up with a cooperative proposal?
Can I say you have added to the confusion - as if it were needed - on this particular topic and I am disappointed because we now see two completely different approaches to the same issue, which has done nothing at all to add light and not heat to the subject before us.
For many, the very expression 'genetically modified organism', is a concept lifted directly from science fiction.
The scientific fact, however, of genetic engineering is that this technology has already improved the quality of life for so many, and with a balanced and practical regulatory environment, it has an exciting future in the whole pharmaceutical, medical, food and feed areas, to name but a few.
We need to lift the moratorium and have a rational regulatory approach to GM technology to allow consumers to make informed choices.
I must say, however, that I am extremely disappointed with the industry's lack of defence of their products and processes and, indeed, even their field trials, against unjustified scare stories.
It is next to lamentable.
They do not deserve any of us standing up here defending their product or their future, because they have gone to ground and covered their head from day one and have made it a very difficult catch-up job now to get a rational common-sense debate in this area.
They must take it on the head for failing to defend their products.
I am also concerned that to some extent the approach lacks scientific rigour in this area.
I fully support my colleague Mr Trakatellis's approach.
If what we do and the legislation we pass is not soundly based in scientific rigour, we bring all the EU regulatory processes into disrepute; and we are going down this road with many of the issues before us in these reports here today.
Not only do we lack scientific rigour in our approach, but we are possibly going to come into conflict with the WTO.
We need a precautionary approach but not a preventive one.
There would be a very important central role for the new EFSA in this whole area, including the rigorous risk assessment of any GM feed prior to authorisation for use in the EU.
There is no analytical method for determining if animal products originate from animals fed GM feed and insistence on such labelling will open the door for misrepresentation, fraud, distortion of competition and so on. The only way to verify will be by on-farm inspections with another army of inspectors.
Please do not send us down that road again.
Finally, a plea for the whisky industry: what is the transition situation?
They lay down their whiskies to age for up to 12 to 20 years.
If we are going to insist on retrospective labelling, how will they be able to compete?
Could you put on the record the future of the whisky industry?
They are particularly concerned.
Mr President, I was about to welcome my parents to the Chamber but as I was told I had to come back at 9 p.m., I do not know if they have made it back in yet.
If they did not know much about GMOs before 3.45 p.m. they certainly know much more about them now.
This year the issue of GMs is hotly topical and controversial.
It has been a key issue in the Scottish Parliament.
In the Welsh Assembly there is talk about a GM-free Wales.
Crop trials are presently being conducted in Scotland.
One is presently under way in a small village in Munlochy, in the Black Isle, where the local community has even kept vigil at the site of an extensive trial.
There is no getting away from this issue.
Food scares over the past decade have meant that consumers want to be sure that what they are eating is safe.
Currently, fears about GM foods run high.
Although the evidence suggests that GM foods are safe, people are unsure about the environmental impact and the obvious unknown.
How do we reassure people over this issue?
How do we make the waves - as Mrs Scheele said - on issues like these?
Labels and traceability are one answer.
The only way to gain the confidence of consumers is to offer a totally traceable, transparent and reliable information system.
Traceability puts the burden of proof on the producer.
Whether the threshold is 1% or 0.5%, if practicable, these are a step forward.
On the subject of labelling, people want as much information as is possible.
This has to rest on quality information.
The jury is out.
A GM-free label has been talked about.
There is a lot of potential there, but it can also mislead consumers because of accidental contamination.
Rules for GM-free labelling exist in Germany, Austria and the Netherlands, but food producers cannot guarantee that products are completely GM free.
These products should not become a costly niche market.
Mrs Scheele's comment on the subject is welcome.
This debate will continue.
We cannot afford to let this opportunity to have proper, practical traceability and labelling of GMs pass us by.
As an article in today's Guardian says, we are at a crossroads.
The vote tomorrow will determine the future of genetically modified food in Europe.
Mr President, 70% of European people do not want to eat GM food, but we are all eating it unwittingly.
Magnum ice creams, for example, are made of processed GM soya.
Unilever and the governments of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands prefer to leave things as they are.
So do the Christian Democrats, the right-wing Liberals and David Bowe of the Socialists.
However, consumers are entitled to information about whether or not they are eating GM food.
Christian Democrats and the right-wing Liberals wish to keep the European people in the dark.
They have one valid argument, namely that the proposed system could lead to deceit.
However, deceit also occurs in the origin of food and the labelling of organic food.
The Christian Democrats and the right-wing Liberals voted in favour on that occasion.
It is quite sickening to think that Christian Democrats and right-wing Liberals should want to feed our citizens GM food unwittingly.
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the European Parliament, I should like to welcome the delegation from the parliament of Taiwan, headed by Mr. Wang, which has taken its seat in the official gallery, and to wish them every success in their work and all the best during their stay with the European Parliament.
The debate on the reports by Mr ?rakatellis and Mrs Scheele is now adjourned until 9 p.m. this evening.
The next item is the Commission statement on corporate social responsibility.
Mr President, I am pleased to announce the adoption today by the Commission of our new strategy on Corporate Social Responsibility.
This document is a follow-up to the Green Paper on CSR, which we presented last summer and, after six months of consultation, we had a large number of very constructive and positive responses from across the Union.
I would like to congratulate and thank Parliament and, in particular, the rapporteur, Mr Howitt, for his contribution to the consultation on the CSR Green Paper.
In a nutshell, the fundamental aim of this strategy is to strengthen the role that business plays in working towards sustainable development in Europe and beyond.
Sustainability is not just a matter of governance or of individuals, it is a matter for business.
CSR is about companies integrating social and environmental concerns in their business operations and in their interaction with their stakeholders on a voluntary basis.
Many firms have already recognised the importance of responsible business and, as a result, CSR schemes have mushroomed.
However, the European Union can add value by helping stakeholders to make CSR more transparent, more open and ultimately more credible.
Corporate social responsibility and corporate governance are two sides of the same coin.
"Greenwashing" your social and environmental performance is as bad as "whitewashing" profits.
This is why more and more firms are realising that CSR is no longer just a job for the marketing department.
The new CSR strategy which has been adopted today - proposed by myself and Mr Liikanen, the Commissioner responsible for enterprise - seeks to complement existing initiatives by companies themselves and by international organisations such as the OECD and the United Nations.
This strategy supports business and other stakeholder efforts for a better trade-off between economic, social and environmental needs in a globalised economy.
It seeks to improve knowledge on CSR through the exchange of good practice, research on the business case for CSR and the development of responsible management skills.
So what in concrete terms have we put forward today?
Allow me to mention three main points.
First, we have proposed setting up a "European Multi-Stakeholder Forum".
Who is it for, what is its purpose and what is it going to do?
This forum will bring together leading European representative organisations of employers, employees, consumers and civil society, as well as business networks across Europe.
This forum will exchange good practice and seek consensus on guiding principles for CSR tools, such as codes of conduct, reporting, labelling schemes and evaluation mechanisms.
This responds to one of the requests made to the Commission in the Howitt report on the Green Paper.
In our view, the forum could play a central role in seeking to set out a common European Union approach based on guiding principles agreed by businesses and stakeholders.
The Commission's strategy to promote CSR builds on the voluntary nature of business efforts.
The role of the forum will be to increase the consensus between enterprises and other stakeholders.
This will help businesses get the most out of their CSR efforts.
Secondly, the strategy will support the promotion of CSR in small and medium-sized enterprises, in particular through awareness raising and capacity-building initiatives, because CSR is by no means the sole preserve of large multinational firms.
Finally, the Commission will work towards integrating CSR principles across the full range of European Union policies: employment and social affairs, enterprise, development, trade and public procurement.
In terms of follow-up, the forum will be asked to present before the summer of 2004 a report on its work to the Commission, which will then evaluate its results, decide on its future and consider if any other initiative, involving business and other stakeholders in particular, is needed to further promote responsible business.
Commissioner, I very much welcome your comments.
They are very wise, as so often.